Produced by Bryan Ness, Barbara Kosker and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)









    +----------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                |
    |                                                    |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the       |
    | original document have been preserved.             |
    |                                                    |
    | Changes listed in the Errata on Pages 191 and 192  |
    | have been made in this e-book.                     |
    |                                                    |
    | This e-book contains a number of unusual accents.  |
    | The caron diacritics, which look like a little v,  |
    | used over R, r and e are represented as [vR],      |
    | [vr] and [ve].                                     |
    +----------------------------------------------------+




ANNALS OF MUSIC IN AMERICA




  _Annals of Music in America_

  A CHRONOLOGICAL RECORD OF SIGNIFICANT
  MUSICAL EVENTS, FROM 1640 TO THE PRESENT
  DAY, WITH COMMENTS ON THE VARIOUS
  PERIODS INTO WHICH THE WORK IS DIVIDED




  BY

  HENRY C. LAHEE




  [Illustration]




  BOSTON
  MARSHALL JONES COMPANY
  MDCCCCXXII




  COPYRIGHT, 1922

  BY MARSHALL JONES COMPANY

  PRINTED OCTOBER, 1922




  THE PLIMPTON PRESS . NORWOOD . MASSACHUSETTS

  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




PREFACE


The object of this book is to give as complete a record as possible of
the beginning and progress of music in the United States of America.

The first things recorded are regarded as important. Hence such items as
the printing of the first book on music, the importation of the first
pipe organs, the establishment of the early musical societies are
recorded, while similar events of a more recent date are of no special
importance.

The first performance of significant works--operas, oratorios,
symphonies and other choral and orchestral works--are chronicled as
carefully as possible; also the first appearance in America of noted
musicians.

It has been practically impossible to find accurate data about the works
of the older composers,--Haydn, Mozart and others, for while there are
many programs in which their names are mentioned the work played is
seldom specified (see Mr. O. G. Sonneck's "Early Concert-Life in
America"), and one must wait until the period arrives in which the work
performed is specified. Probably some of the works mentioned had earlier
performances by small organizations but the performances recorded here
are in all probability the first adequate ones.

Among the items recorded are some which cannot be regarded as marking
the musical progress of the country, and yet are items of musical
interest;--the first performance of "The Star-Spangled Banner" and of
"America" do not mark any progress and yet are historic events.

The establishment of Gilmore's Band and Sousa's Band are items of
interest rather than of educational progress.

In compiling this work such newspapers as are available have been
consulted, also the programs of the leading choral and orchestral
societies. Valuable help has been gained from the excellent works of Mr.
Oscar G. Sonneck, Mr. E. H. Krehbiel, Mr. Philip Goepp, Mr. George P.
Upton, Allston Brown and other writers on the American stage, and above
all from the admirable notes of Mr. Philip Hale in the programs of the
Boston Symphony Orchestra. It would be ungracious to close this preface
without acknowledging with gratitude the valuable assistance of Miss
Barbara Duncan of the Boston Public Library.

  HENRY C. LAHEE




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                               PAGE

          Preface                          v

      I.  1640-1750                        1

     II.  1750-1800                        5

    III.  1800-1825                       14

     IV.  1825-1850                       20

      V.  1850-1875                       36

     VI.  1875-1890                       64

    VII.  1890-1900                       95

   VIII.  1900-1921                      117

          Index of Compositions          193

          Miscellaneous Items            280




  ANNALS OF MUSIC IN AMERICA




_Annals of Music in America_




CHAPTER I

1640-1750


The Annals of Music in America during the first hundred years contain
very little that would seem to be of any importance to the musicians of
today. Nevertheless it is as interesting to note the beginnings of music
in this newly settled country as to watch the appearance of the baby's
first tooth.

The first settlement at Plymouth took place in 1620, and we find that in
1640 the colonists were already busy with the printing press in
Cambridge, Mass., and the second book which came from the press was a
reprint of an English Psalm book, printed under the title of the Bay
Psalm Book. This was not an original work, but its production shows that
music was already a living problem, and was even then part of the life
of the colonists.

Practically nothing more of note happened until the importation of the
first pipe organ, in 1700. This was quickly followed by other similar
instruments in different parts of the country, and even by the building
of organs by Americans, the first being by John Clemm in New York, which
contained three manuals and twenty-six stops, and the next by Edward
Bromfield in Boston. Bromfield's organ had two manuals and 1200 pipes,
but was not completed when he died in 1746.

The early history of music in New England, as handed down to us by
writers on the subject, seems to have consisted chiefly of church
singing, concerning which there were many controversies. The early
composers of New England were mainly occupied in composing psalm tunes,
and in teaching singing schools.

The accounts of secular music come chiefly from Charleston, S. C., at
which place many musicians entered this continent after visiting the
West Indies. In fact, the first song recital on record in America took
place at Charleston in 1733, while Boston had a concert in 1731 and
Charleston had one in 1732. Charleston also claims the first performance
of ballad opera on record in America (1735).

It must not, however, be supposed that New England had no secular music.
The concert above mentioned goes to show the contrary. Also there is a
record of small wind instruments, such as oboes and flageolets, being
brought to Boston for the purposes of trade--possibly with the idea that
New England shepherds might play to their sheep, as shepherds in other
countries are supposed to do.

We know that every farm had its spinning wheel and that clothes were
made of the homespun woollens, but neither historian nor poet has ever
pictured a New England shepherd with the shepherd's pipe. Imagination
has not so far run riot.

Music was in a very elementary stage during the first hundred years. The
country was sparsely populated, and music depends on the existence of a
community. Even in 1750 the cows, according to tradition, were still
occupied, during their daily peregrinations, in laying out the streets
of the future city of Boston,--a city which was destined to be one of
the leaders in matters musical.

  NOTE. _When a work is mentioned as "given" or "played" or
    "presented," it means the first performance in America.
    When "produced" or "production" or "premiere" is used the
    first public performance anywhere is indicated._

  1640. The "Bay Psalm Book" published, first American book of
    sacred music. The second book printed in America.

  1700. The first pipe organ to reach America from Europe was placed
    in the Episcopal Church at Port Royal, Va. About 1860 it was
    removed to Hancock, and later to Shepherdstown, W. Va.

  1712. First practical instruction book on singing in New England,
    published by John Tufts of Newbury, Mass.

  1713. First pipe organ brought into New England presented to
    King's Chapel, Boston, by Thomas Brattle. (Now in St. John's
    Chapel, Portsmouth, N. H.)

  1720. First singing societies established in New England.

  1716. First mention of the importation of flageolets, hautbois and
    other instruments, by Edward Enstone, of Boston.

  1722. A playhouse existed near the market place, Williamsburg, Va.
    The first theatre known to exist in America.

  1728. A pipe organ placed in Christ Church, Philadelphia.

  1731. Dec. First concert recorded in Boston, given at the rooms of
    Mr. Pelham, near the Sun Tavern.

  1732. April. A concert given for the benefit of Mr. Salter, at the
    Council Chamber, Charleston, S. C.

  1733. A pipe organ placed in Trinity Church, Newport, R. I., being
    the second organ in New England.

  1733. Feb. 26. First song recital recorded in America, given at
    the playhouse in Queen St., Charleston, S. C.

  1735. Feb. 8. First performance of ballad opera on record in
    America--"Flora, or Hob in the Well"--given at the Courtroom,
    Charleston, S. C.

  1735. July 1.--1794. Dec. 25. James Lyon, psalmodist. Probably the
    second American composer.

  1736. Jan. 12. The first concert recorded in New York City, given
    for the benefit of Mr. Pachelbel. (Probably not the first
    concert given in that city.)

  1737. First Pipe Organ completed in America, built by John Clemm,
    and placed in Trinity Church, New York City. Three manuals,
    twenty-six stops.

  1737. Sept. 11--1791. May 9. Francis Hopkinson. The first American
    poet-composer.

  1742. Moravian settlement established in Bethlehem, Pa. Became
    noted in musical matters.

  1742. June. First Singstunde held at Bethlehem, Pa. Eighty people
    present.

  1743. Records of this date show that two organs existed in the
    Moravian Church, Broad St., Philadelphia, Pa., and that stringed
    instruments were used in the services, also that instruments
    (violin, viola da braccio, viola da gamba, flutes and French
    horns) were played for the first time in the Moravian Church,
    Bethlehem, Pa.

  1745-6. The first pipe organ built in New England, in Boston, by
    Edward Bromfield. Two manuals and twelve hundred pipes.
    Bromfield died in 1746 before completing the instrument.

  1746. Oct. 7. William Billings, First New England composer,
    organizer of singing societies, etc. Billings died Sept. 29,
    1800.




CHAPTER II

1750-1800


The first item of especial interest in this period is the performance of
the "Beggar's Opera" at the "Theatre in Nassau Street," New York. This
theatre was a rather tumbledown affair and was not built for the
purpose. It had a platform and rough benches. The chandelier was a
barrel hoop through which several nails were driven, and on these nails
were impaled candles, which provided all the light, and from which the
tallow was likely to drip on the heads of such of the audience as had
the best seats.

But three years later (in 1753) Lewis Hallam, who had been giving
performances with his company in the more southern States, got
permission to build a theatre on the site of this old place, and the
house was opened in September with a play, "The Conscious Lovers,"
followed by a ballad farce, "Damon and Phillida."

In 1759 we find the first avowedly musical organization in America, "The
Orpheus Club," was in existence in Philadelphia, and concerts were
becoming more frequent. We also find a St. Cecilia Society founded in
Charleston, S. C., an organization which lasted for a hundred and fifty
years.

Other societies followed at short intervals and in widely scattered
localities; the "Handel Society" of Dartmouth College, about 1780, the
"Stoughton (Mass.) Musical Society," 1786, and "The Musical Society" of
New York City, all tend to show that social centres were developing, and
the people were finding expression in music.

An indication of what had been growing by degrees is found in the
reports of concerts. Mention of instruments such as violins, French
horns, oboes, trombones, etc., was made here and there, and especially
in connection with the Moravian settlements in Bethlehem, Pa., where was
established the first music school.

We find the first mention of an orchestra made in connection with a
performance of "The Beggar's Opera" at Upper Marlboro, Md., in 1752, and
a few years later (1788) a great concert was given in Philadelphia with
an orchestra of fifty and a chorus of two hundred performers.

There is also a record of a concert given in Charleston, S. C., in 1796,
when an orchestra of thirty instruments was employed in a performance of
Gluck's overture to "Iphegenie en Aulide," and Haydn's "Stabat Mater."

It is quite possible that orchestras were used more or less in other
concerts. Mr. Sonneck shows, in his "Early Concert-Life in America,"
many programs in which orchestral works are mentioned. And it is well to
state here that it is almost impossible to locate the first performance
in America of many of the works of the older composers, including Haydn
and Mozart, because no opus number is mentioned, nor anything to
indicate the identity of the work. Pleyel, Gluck and Clementi were much
in vogue.

The American composer was beginning to be heard from during this period.
Francis Hopkinson, who is generally regarded as the first American
composer, wrote, in 1759, a song with the title "My Days Have Been So
Wondrous Free." Some time later, in 1788, a small volume of songs was
published under the title "Seven Songs," by the same composer.

Francis Hopkinson was a well-educated man, a signer of the Declaration
of Independence, a member of the Convention of 1787 which formulated the
Constitution of the United States, first Judge of the Admiralty Court in
Pennsylvania, and author of many pamphlets and poems.

A man of entirely different calibre was William Billings, who was
considered the first composer in New England. His compositions were
chiefly "fuguing tunes," and he published several psalm books.

Billings was a tanner by trade, but a great musical enthusiast and
organizer. The Stoughton (Mass.) Musical Society, which is the oldest
musical society still in existence, was organized by Billings. Lack of
education was no bar to his activities, and he accomplished much with
very limited means.

It is said that Billings introduced the bass viol into the services of
the Church, and thus began to break down the ancient Puritanical
prejudices against musical instruments. He was also the first to use the
pitch-pipe in order to ensure some degree of certainty in "striking up
the tune" in church.

Again, we find the first American ballad operas during this period.
Benjamin Carr, an Englishman who had been in America a couple of years,
produced in 1796 a ballad opera, "The Archers of Switzerland," and,
shortly afterwards, in the same year, with Pellesier (a Frenchman of
recent arrival) as librettist, another ballad opera, "Edwin and
Angelina," was staged in New York City. Though these works could hardly
be called distinctively American, they were the first composed and
produced in this country.

During the last decade of the 18th century some French actors and
singers invaded the country and made New Orleans their headquarters.
From that time on, for many years, New Orleans was prominent in the
production of French operas and plays.

Theatres were built in several of the larger cities, and noted singers
began to appear from abroad. The first of these appears to have been
Miss Broadhurst, who appeared in Philadelphia in 1793, at the Chestnut
Street Theatre. She was closely followed by Mrs. Oldmixon.

  1750. April 30. "The Mock Doctor," and Dec. 3, "The Beggar's
    Opera," given at the "Theatre in Nassau St.," New York City.
    The first performances of ballad opera on record in that city.

  1750. A Collegium Musicum was established about this time at
    Bethlehem, Pa.

  1752. Sept. 14. First record of an orchestra being employed, at a
    performance of "The Beggar's Opera" at Upper Marlborough, Md.

  1753. Sept. 13. The first theatre (built for the purpose) in New
    York City, erected in August and opened in September with "The
    Conscious Lovers" followed by the ballad farce, "Damon and
    Phillida," given by Lewis Hallam's company.

  1754. First concert hall in Boston opened by Gilbert Deblois, at
    the corner of Hanover and Courts Sts.

  1756. Mar. 16. New organ built by Gilbert Ash, dedicated at the
    City Hall, New York City, when an organ-concerto by G. A. Hasse
    was played.

        In the same year a new organ was placed in King's Chapel,
      Boston, replacing the Brattle organ.

  1756. The first mention of French horns in America made by
    Benjamin Franklin, writing of the fine music in the church at
    Bethlehem, Pa., where flutes, oboes, French horns, and trumpets
    were accompanied by the organ.

  1757. Dr. Arne's "Masque of Alfred" given in Philadelphia by the
    students of the College of Philadelphia.

  1759. The first known American song, "My Days Have Been so
    Wondrous Free," composed by Francis Hopkinson.

  1759. The first avowedly musical organization in America, "The
    Orpheus Club," existed in Philadelphia, and was probably founded
    about this time.

  1761. Feb. 3. Concert given by Mr. Dipper, organist of King's
    Chapel, Boston, in which two French horns were used. First
    mention of this instrument in New England.

  1761. "Urania, or a Choice Collection of Psalm Tunes, Anthems, and
    Hymns, from the most approved Authors," published in
    Philadelphia, by James Lyon, A.B.

  1762. A St. Cecilia Society (which lasted for one hundred and
    fifty years) formed in Charleston, S. C.

  1765. A concert of "Musical Glasses" given in Philadelphia.

  1765. June 3. The New York _Mercury_ announced a series of summer
    concerts (open air) to be given at Ranelagh Gardens. These
    concerts were continued for four years.

  1769. First American spinet made by John Harris, in Boston.

  1770. Jan. 9. Handel's "Messiah" performed in part (sixteen
    numbers) at Trinity Church, New York City.

  1770. Milton's "Masque of Comus" given by the Hallam Company, in
    Philadelphia.

  1770. "The New England Psalm Singer" published in Boston, by
    William Billings.

  1770, The pipe organ said to have been used for the first time in
    a Congregational church in America (Philadelphia).

  1774. John Behrent, of Philadelphia, said to have made the first
    American piano.

  1780. (c) The Handel Society of Dartmouth College organized at
    Hanover, N. H.

  1784. A "Harmonic Society" formed about this time at
    Fredericksburg, Va.

  1786. Stoughton (Mass.) Musical Society formed by William
    Billings, with Squire Elijah Dunbar of Canton as President;
    probably oldest singing society now in existence in America.

  1786. Nov. 9. A society formed in New York City, at Mr. Hulett's
    rooms, for promoting vocal music.

  1787. "Uranian Society" formed in Philadelphia for the improvement
    of church music. Continued till 1800.

  1787. First pipe organ west of the Alleghanies set up in Cookstown
    (now Fayette City), Pa. Built by Joseph Downer, who was born in
    Brookline, Mass., 1767 (Jan. 28) and trekked to Pennsylvania
    with his family. The organ is preserved at the Carnegie
    Institute, Pittsburgh.

  1788. May 4. A great concert given with an orchestra of fifty and
    a chorus of two hundred, in the Reformed German Church in
    Philadelphia, Pa.

  1788. "The Musical Society" of New York City established.

  1788. Publication of a book entitled "Seven Songs" by F.
    Hopkinson (1737-1791), the first publication in America of songs
    by a native composer.

  1789. May. 15. Concert given at Salem, Mass., by Gottlieb Graupner
    in which first mention is made of the use of the oboe (hautbois)
    in New England.

  1790. June 4. A company of French comedians gave a performance, in
    French, of the opera "The Mistress and Maid" at Baltimore, Md.

  1790. Oct. 7. First performance in America of Audinet-Gossec's "Le
    Tonnelier" given at the City Tavern, New York City.

  1790-1800. During this period the following musical works were
    known and performed in New Orleans, Charleston, S. C.,
    Baltimore, Philadelphia and New York City: Rousseau's
    "Pygmalion" and "Devin du Village"; Dalayrac's "Nina" and
    "L'Amant Statue"; Monsigny's "Deserteur"; Gretry's "Zemire et
    Azor," "La Fausse Magic" and "Richard Coeur de Lion," by a
    company of French comedians.

  1791. A "Cecilia Society" formed in New York City. Lasted but a
    short time. An "Apollo Society" was also in existence.

  1792. Oliver Holden, composer of "Coronation" and other well known
    hymn tunes, published his "American Harmony," and in 1793, "The
    Union Harmony."

  1792-1872. Lowell Mason. Composer, educator in music. First
    teacher of singing in the public schools. President of the
    Handel and Haydn Society, Boston.

  1793. "Uranian Society" of New York City, organized for sacred
    vocal music.

  1793. Miss Broadhurst, a noted singer, made her American debut in
    Philadelphia.

  1793. Jacob Kimball (1761-1826, born Topsfield, Mass.,) published
    his "Rural Harmony."

  1793. A company of French players reached America from San
    Domingo, remaining three years. They played in Norfolk, Va., in
    1793, Charleston, S. C., 1794, Richmond, Va., 1795, Boston, Jan.
    1796, and Philadelphia, Dec. 1796.

  1793. A "Cecilia Society" was in existence at this time in
    Newport, R. I.

  1794. Paisiello's opera "The Barber of Seville" (English version)
    was played in Baltimore, Philadelphia, New York City and
    elsewhere.

  1794. Mrs. Oldmixon, a noted singer, made her first appearance in
    America at the Chestnut St. Theatre, Philadelphia, in "Robin
    Hood."

  1796. April 18. "The Archers of Switzerland," an opera by B. Carr,
    produced in New York City. It is claimed by some authorities
    that this was the first American opera.

  1796. July. Gluck's overture to "Iphegenie en Aulide," and Haydn's
    "Stabat Mater," given in Charleston, S. C., with an orchestra of
    about thirty instruments. Mrs. Pownall, J. H. Harris and Mr.
    Bergman, soloists.

  1796. Dec. 19. Production in New York City of "Edwin and
    Angelina," music by Pellesier. Also said to be the first opera
    of American composition. (Carr was English, Pellesier French.)

  1797. Anniversary meeting of the Concord (N. H.) Musical Society.

  1797. Jan. 25. First recorded performance in America of Gretry's
    opera, "Richard Coeur de Lion," given at the Federal St.
    Theatre, Boston.

  1798. Columbia Garden Summer Concerts established in New York.
    Lasted till 1800.

  1798. Concerts are on record as having been given at Albany, N.
    Y., April 18; New Brunswick, N. J., Dec. 11; Trenton, N. J.,
    Dec. 18; also an interesting group in Salem, Mass., by Gottlieb
    Graupner.

  1798. Jan. 29. Park Theatre opened in New York City with a
    performance of a musical piece entitled "The Purse,--or American
    Tar." This theatre was, for twenty years, important in local
    musical history.

  1798. April 25. First public performance of "Hail Columbia" by
    Gilbert Fox in Philadelphia. The words were written by Joseph
    Hopkinson Smith (1770-1842) and sung to the tune of "The
    President's March." First sung under the title of "Federal
    Song" but changed a few days later to "Hail Columbia."

  1799. A "Musical Society" existed in Baltimore.

  1799. "Euterpean Society" formed in New York City.

  1799. "The Vintage," an American opera by Pellesier and Dunlap,
    produced in New York City.




CHAPTER III

1800-1825


In 1800 we find the first mention of the use of the bassoon. This was in
Bethlehem, Pa., and it seems to complete the list of instruments for the
average orchestra. Notwithstanding the record of the importation of
oboes, many years earlier, and the fact that Graupner, one of the
leading musicians in Boston about this time, was, or had been an
oboeist, some historian has stated that even well into the nineteenth
century there was only one oboe player in the United States, and he
lived in Baltimore. Surely this must be an error.

In December 1800 we find the first annual concert of the Philharmonic
Society in New York City. This society died in a few years, and in 1820
another Philharmonic Society was formed. This society also dwindled,
though it did not die, for in 1840 it was reorganized, and has ever
since taken a leading part in the musical life of New York.

Many musical societies made a beginning. Few lived long. But of those
which lived perhaps the most noted is the Handel and Haydn Society of
Boston, formed in 1815. This society gave what was claimed to be the
first complete performance of Handel's "Messiah," but it is also
claimed that this was done in 1801 in the hall of the University of
Pennsylvania.

The Handel and Haydn Society also gave what was called the first
complete performance of Haydn's "Creation," an honor which is also
ascribed to King's Chapel in 1816, while portions had been performed in
1811 at Bethlehem, Pa. Thus it is difficult to fix definitely the first
performances of many of the large works. In later days, especially in
the case of Wagner's operas, portions were given at concerts long before
complete stage performances were essayed.

Another musical society which is in existence at the present day, and
which undoubtedly has had much influence on the musical life of America,
was the Pierian Sodality of Harvard University, established in 1808 by
the undergraduates.

In Philadelphia we find the establishment of the Musical Fund Society,
which, for a number of years, did much to promote good music in that
city. At its first concert, on April 24, 1821, Beethoven's First
Symphony was played for the first time in America. Mr. Goepp gives us a
full account of this and tells us that the whole symphony was too severe
a task for an audience of that period, so the performance was broken and
diversified by vocal and other solos between the movements.

New England possessed several musical societies in 1821, by which
performances of oratorio were given. The Sacred Music Society was
formed in New York City in 1823 and lasted till 1849. So it may easily
be seen that, as the population increased, musical societies were soon
established.

Theatres, while not strictly part of the musical life of the country,
can hardly be separated from it because they were the home of ballad
operas, and all musical stage representations. They were already in
existence in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia before the beginning of
the nineteenth century, but we find in 1807, the opening of "Le Theatre
St. Philippe" in New Orleans with Mehul's one-act opera, "Une Folie."
This theatre being burned in 1817, a new one, "Le Theatre d'Orleans,"
was built and opened in the following year. This theatre was the finest
in the country at that time and was the home of opera for a number of
years. The record of opera in New Orleans is incomplete, but it is well
known that New Orleans was the home of French opera in America long
before it became popular in other parts of the country.

But America was gradually edging up to the time of grand opera. Singers
were arriving from abroad and brought with them their ambitions. We find
that an English version of Rossini's opera, "Il Barbiere," was given at
the Park Theatre, New York City, in 1819, with Miss Leesugg as Rosina,
and in 1823 an English version of Mozart's "Le Nozze di Figaro" was
presented. Again in the early part of 1825, Weber's opera "Der
Freyschuetz" was presented, in English, at the Park Theatre, with Miss
Kelly and Mrs. de Luce in the leading parts. Similar performances
followed in other cities, and the country was thus gradually prepared
for the real thing,--grand opera,--in its native language.

While the record of items during the period 1800 to 1825 is not very
long it still shows considerable progress. The people grew up in a
country where there was little musical cultivation, where there were
small communities, and where the struggle for existence had been the
first consideration. They responded warmly to the efforts of the country
singing teacher, the choral society promoter, and later to the producer
of opera, and if history shows many failures, it may be pointed out that
these failures could not have taken place if no effort had been made.
Perhaps efforts in many cases were premature. Also there was much to
learn in the management of masses of people. The virtues of a true
democracy are nowhere more necessary than in a choral society.

  1800. Bassoon used in Bethlehem, Pa.

  1800. Dec. 23. First Annual Concert of the Philharmonic Society
    given at Tontine Hall, Broadway, New York City.

  1801. Handel's "Messiah" given in the hall of the University of
    Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

  1802. "Harmonic Society" founded in Philadelphia.

  1803. Benjamin Crehore of Milton, Mass., made the first pianoforte
    in New England.

  1807. Massachusetts Musical Society formed in Boston for improving
    the mode of performing sacred music. Ceased to exist in 1820.

  1807. "Le Theatre St. Philippe" opened in New Orleans with a
    one-act opera by Mehul,--"Une Folie."

  1808. The Pierian Sodality, half musical, half social club
    organized by the undergraduates of Harvard University.

  1809. Haydn Society formed in Philadelphia.

  1811. John Davis, from San Domingo, opened the "Theatre d'Orleans"
    in New Orleans.

  1811. Haydn's "Creation" and "The Seasons" performed in part at
    Bethlehem, Pa.

  1813-1893. John S. Dwight, editor, critic, member of Brook Farm
    community, and founder in 1852 of "Dwight's Journal of Music,"
    the first publication of its kind in America.

  1814. Sept. 14. The words of "The Star-Spangled Banner" written by
    Francis Scott Key during the bombardment of Fort Henry. They
    were published next day as a "Broadside" and on the 20th
    appeared in the "Baltimore Patriot." The tune of "Anacreon in
    Heaven" was adapted by the author.

  1815. April 20. Handel and Haydn Society, Boston, organized with
    Thomas S. Webb as President. At the first concert the chorus
    consisted of about one hundred, of whom ten were women.
    Orchestra a dozen instruments, and organ.

  1816. First complete performance of Haydn's "Creation" given at
    King's Chapel, Boston.

  1817. Charles B. Incledon, noted English tenor singer, visited
    America.

  1818. New Theatre d'Orleans, the finest in the United States,
    opened in New Orleans. The old theatre was burned in 1817. The
    new theatre was the home of opera for some years.

  1818. Dec. 25. The Handel and Haydn Society of Boston gave what is
    called the first complete performance of Handel's "Messiah" in
    America. (Philip Goepp states that the "Messiah" was given in
    1801, in the hall of the University of Pennsylvania.)

  1819. "Haydn Society" formed in Cincinnati, O.

  1819. Feb. 16. First complete performance of Haydn's "Creation"
    given by the Handel and Haydn Society, Boston. (This was claimed
    also in 1816 for a performance at King's Chapel.)

  1819. An English version of Rossini's "Barber of Seville" given in
    New York City, with Miss Leesugg as _Rosina_, at the Park
    Theatre.

  1820. Philharmonic Society organized in Bethlehem, Pa. (Originally
    the Collegium Musicum of 1750.)

  1820. Two musical societies formed in New York City, viz.,--the
    Philharmonic, and the Euterpean.

        The Philharmonic used to engage prominent artists. It
      gradually dwindled but was reorganized in 1840.

        The Euterpean gave concerts which were usually followed
      by a supper and a ball. It ceased to exist about 1845.

  1820. Aug. 30. George F. Root, noted American song-writer. Died
    Aug. 6, 1895.

  1820. The Philadelphia Musical Fund Society established. Gave its
    first concert April 24, 1821, when Beethoven's First Symphony
    was played for the first time in America. (Between the movements
    vocal and other solos were given by sundry artists.)

  1821. New England musical matters on record of this year are: An
    oratorio given by the Psallion Society of Providence, R. I.;

        A performance of music by the New Hampshire Musical
      Society at Hanover, N. H.;

        The existence of a Beethoven Society in Portland, Me.

  1823. Production in New York City of "Clari, the Maid of the
    Mill," ballad opera by Sir Henry Bishop and J. Howard Payne.
    This opera contains the song, "Home, Sweet Home." Was presented
    in London on May 23.

  1823. May 23. Mozart's opera, "The Marriage of Figaro" (Bishop's
    English version), presented in New York City at the Park
    Theatre.

  1823. The pianoforte manufacturing house of Jonas Chickering
    established in Boston.

  1823-1849. Sacred Music Society, New York City.

  1824. St. Cecilia Society formed in Philadelphia.




CHAPTER IV

1825-1850


During these twenty-five years the list of items on record is far
greater than during any preceding period of similar time. Possibly this
may be accounted for by the greater facilities for travel both by sea
and land. Railroads were gradually spreading out through the country,
and helping to develop distant trading stations into towns and cities.
Steamships were making the voyage from Europe a more feasible adventure.
We shall see this as we proceed.

In what we may call the domestic side of music we find the establishment
of more singing societies in all the eastern cities. There was
practically no "west" in 1825, but Chicago shows up in 1834 with "The
Old Settlers' Harmonic Society." The story of Chicago's early musical
days may be read in Mr. George P. Upton's book of reminiscences. The
remarkable part of it seems to be that Chicago grew phenomenally, and
today stands as a rival to New York in all matters musical, although in
1825 Chicago was merely a trading post and New York was already a city
of some size.

The musical convention came into being. The first is said to have been
held at Concord, N. H., in September 1829. There is also a claim that
the first musical convention was held in Montpelier, Vt., in 1839 but
this is not quite correct. It may have been the first convention in
Vermont. Musical conventions became popular and frequent and are so even
to the present day, though the methods and matter have changed with the
times.

Another item which may come under the head of domestic music is the
beginning of music teaching in the public schools. This was effected by
Lowell Mason, as an experiment, in 1838. At the present day chorus
singing in the public schools has become an important matter, and is
almost universal.

In 1838 we find a Philharmonic Society in St. Louis, showing that St.
Louis was not far behind Chicago in getting into the musical world.

In Boston an Academy of Music was established by Lowell Mason in 1833.
It had a large number of pupils, and there was an orchestra in
connection with it, which gave several concerts. But the Harvard Musical
Association, which was founded in 1837, seems to have been the chief
propelling power to orchestral music in Boston, until the formation of
the Boston Symphony Orchestra. In New York the Philharmonic Society was
reorganized and was, as it has been ever since, the most prominent
orchestral organization of that city.

In 1848 two complete orchestras came to America, Gungl's, which gave a
number of concerts, chiefly of light music, and the Germania, which
consisted of a number of refugees from the German government. These men
gave concerts of a finer type than had yet been given in America. Their
career as an organization was not long, and it ended in disaster, but
many of the members became prominent in musical matters in various
cities, and in this way the Germania orchestra had a beneficial and
lasting effect upon music in this country.

In the forties began the stream of violin and piano virtuosi which has
continued in ever-increasing volume to the present day. Ole Bull,
violinist, in 1843, Vieuxtemps and Artot, violinists, and Leopold von
Meyer, pianist, in 1844, were the first.

Perhaps the development of opera may be considered of greater interest
than other musical items. In 1825 Manuel Garcia arrived in New York, and
gave the first performances of Italian opera. In his company were his
daughter Maria, who married one Malibran and remained in New York for
about two years. At the end of this time she left her husband and
returned to Europe, where she had a short but very brilliant career.
Young Garcia, the son, who also sang, afterwards became one of the
greatest singing teachers in Europe, and invented the laryngoscope.
Pauline, who became Madame Viardot, and lived to a great age, was too
young to participate in Garcia's performances in New York. For many
years she was one of the great singing teachers in Paris.

Garcia did not stay very long in New York, but he began the efforts to
present Italian opera, which were continued by many others from time to
time, usually with disaster. Nevertheless, the history of the period
from 1825 to 1850 is full of first performances of Italian opera. In
1848 the Havana Company visited the United States, and was considered
the finest company that had been heard until that time.

In the same year Max Maretzek appeared in New York and at once entered
the operatic field, with which he was prominently occupied during the
next period.

Before finishing the review of this period we must not forget the
production William Henry Fry's opera, "Leonora." This was the first
grand opera written and produced by an American. It had several
representations, but does not seem to have lived long. The same,
however, may be said of many of the Italian operas which were presented
during this and later periods. A careful perusal of the list will show
the names of operas long since defunct, so far as the American public is
concerned. Yet there are many, which were first presented to the
American public in this period, and which are as popular today as
ever,--in fact no good opera company can afford to be without them.
Opera was well started by 1850.

  1825. Mar. 12. Weber's opera "Der Freyschuetz" presented in
    English at the Park Theatre, New York City, with Miss Kelly and
    Mrs. de Luce in the leading parts.

  1825. Nov. 26. First season of Italian grand opera in America
    opened in New York city with a performance of Rossini's "Il
    Barbiere," by Manuel Garcia's company.

        This company included Manuel Garcia, his son Manuel
      (later a renowned vocal teacher, and inventor of the laryngoscope),
      his daughter, Maria Felicite (the great Malibran),
      his daughter Pauline (later Madame Viardot, one of the
      great vocal teachers of Paris) and others of less note.

        The other operas presented during this season were:

        1825. Dec. 31. "Tancredi," Rossini.
        1826. April 25. "Semiramide," Rossini.
        1826. May 23. "Don Giovanni," Mozart.
        1826. Dec. 27. "L'Amante Astuto," Garcia.
        Also (dates uncertain):
        "La Figlia del Aria," Garcia.
        "Il Turco in Italia," Rossini.
        "La Cenerentola," Rossini.

  1826-1864. Stephen Foster. Noted song writer.

  1827. July 13. The French Opera Company from New Orleans, which
    visited Philadelphia, and several other cities, opened a season
    at the Park Theatre, New York City, with Rossini's "La
    Cenerentola." They also presented "Jean de Paris," "La Dame
    Blanche," "Joconde," "Les Visilandines," etc.

  1827. Sept. 28. Boieldieu's opera "Jean de Paris" presented in New
    York City, with Malibran. Later in the season the same
    composer's "Caliph of Bagdad" was given.

  1827. Oct. 9. Weber's opera "Oberon" presented in Philadelphia.

  1827. Oct. 9. Farewell of Madame Malibran (Maria Felicite Garcia)
    at the Bowery Theatre, after two years' residence in New York
    City.

  1828. An English version of "Il Barbiere di Seviglia," and "Der
    Freyschuetz" given in Boston with Miss George, Mrs. Papanti, Mr.
    Comer, and Mr. Horn as leading singers.

  1829. Sept. First musical convention held under the auspices of
    the Central Musical Society of Concord, N. H.

  1829. May 8.-1869. Dec. 18. Louis Moreau Gottschalk, brilliant
    pianist. Born in New Orleans.

  1829. Jan. 24.-1908. July 14. William Mason, noted American
    pianist and teacher.

  1831. Sept. 6. American debut of Miss Hughes at the Park Theatre,
    New York City, in "The Marriage of Figaro."

  1832. Mar. 17. Mozart's opera "Die Zauberfloete" presented in
    Philadelphia.

  1832. July 4. The National Hymn "America" first sung in public at
    a children's celebration of Independence Day, at the Park St.
    Church, Boston, The words were written in February by the Rev.
    Samuel F. Smith, and were sung to the tune of "God Save the
    King."

  1832. Sept. 25. First appearance, in concert, of an Italian opera
    company organized by Lorenzo da Ponte, Italian poet and
    librettist, at Niblo's Garden, New York City. The leading
    singers were Signora Pedrotti and Signori Fornisari and
    Montresor. The opera performances were given at the Bowery
    Theatre. Sig. Rapetti, conductor.

  1832. Oct. 19. Mercadante's opera "Elisa e Claudio" presented in
    New York City with Pedrotti (debut) and Salvione (debut).

  1832. Nov. 5. Rossini's opera "L'Italiana in Algeri" given in New
    York City with Verducci, Fanetti, Fornisari, etc.

  1832. Dec. 5. Bellini's opera "Il Pirata" by same company.

  1832. Dec. 22. Rossini's sacred opera "Mose in Egitto" by same
    company.

  1833. Mar. 13-20. Rossini's opera "Othello" presented twice during
    this week, in New York City, by same company.

  1833. June 20. Auber's opera "Fra Diavolo" presented at the Park
    Theatre, New York City.

  1833. Sept. 4. American debut of Mr. and Mrs. Wood in "Cinderella"
    at the Park Theatre, New York City.

  1833. Nov. 18. Verdi's opera "La Gazza Ladra" given in New York
    City, at the Bowery Theatre, by the Italian Opera Company.

  1833. Academy of Music founded in Boston by Lowell Mason. Enrolled
    twenty-two hundred pupils the first year.

  1834. Mar. 21. Rossini's opera "La Donna del Lago" given at the
    Bowery Theatre, New York City, with Clotilde and Rosina Fanti,
    Marozo, Raviglia and Sapignoli.

  1834. Mar. 22. Salvioni's opera "La Casa dei Vendere."

  1834. Mar. 24. Rossini's "Matilda de Shabran" with Fanti.

  1834. April 7. Meyerbeer's opera "Roberto il Diavolo," presented
    in English at the Park Theatre, New York City, by Mr. and Mrs.
    Wood.

  1834. July 9. First music school in Chicago opened by Miss Wyeth.

  1834. July 12. Pacini's opera "Gli Arabi nelli Gallie" given at
    the Bowery Theatre, New York City, with C. Fanti, R. Fanti,
    Bordogni, Raviglia, Sapignoli.

  1834. Nov. 10 Bellini's opera "La Straniera" given in New York
    City, with C. and R. Fanti, Porto, Montresor, Sapignoli.

  1834. Nov. 25. Rossini's opera "Edoardo e Cristina" given in New
    York City, with Fanti, Fabj, Porto, Sapignoli.

  1834. Dec. 12. Rossini's opera "L'Inganno Felice" given in New
    York City by the Italian Opera Company.

  1834. Dec. 11. "Old Settlers' Harmonic Society" organized in
    Chicago.

  1834-1901. Charles R. Adams, noted tenor and vocal teacher. One of
    the first American singers to make a career in Europe.

  1834-1891. Eben Tourjee, noted organizer of musical affairs. Began
    class-system of pianoforte-teaching in America at Providence, R.
    I., in 1851. Founded a Musical Institute at East Greenwich, R.
    I., in 1859, and the New England Conservatory of Music in
    Boston, 1867. Was one of the chief organizers of the Peace
    Jubilee, and one of the founders of the Music Teachers' National
    Association.

  1835. Feb. 6. Rossini's opera "L'Assedio di Corinto" given in New
    York City with Fanti, Julia Wheatley, Ravaglia. During this
    season Rossini's "Turco in Italia" and Cimarosa's "Il Matrimonio
    Segreto" are said to have been presented by this Italian
    company.

  1835. April 8. Charlotte Cushman, noted actress, made her first
    public appearance as a singer in a performance of "The Marriage
    of Figaro" in Boston, with Mr. and Mrs. Wood.

  1835. Nov. 13. Bellini's opera "La Sonnambula" given in English
    with Mr. and Mrs. Wood in the leading parts, in New York City.

  1835. German Maennerchor of Philadelphia (the oldest German
    singing society in America) founded by Philip Wolsifer.

  1835. Oliver Ditson began publishing music in his own name in
    Boston, but the firm of O. Ditson and Company can be traced back
    to 1783, when E. Batelle opened the Boston Book Store at 8 State
    Street.

  1835-1905. Theodore Thomas, noted musician and conductor of:

        1862-1891 Brooklyn Philharmonic Society.
        1864-1878 New York Symphony Society.
        1865-1891 New York Summer Garden Concerts.
        1873-1894 Cincinnati Festivals.
        1877-1890 Chicago Summer Night Concerts.
        1877-1891 Philharmonic Society, New York.
        1882-1891 Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.
        1891-1905 Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1837. Harvard Musical Association organized in Boston.

  1837. The pianoforte manufacturing house of Knabe established in
    Baltimore.

  1837. Oct. 30. American debut of Madame Caradori-Allan, noted
    soprano, in Rossini's opera "Il Barbiere di Seviglia" at the
    Park Theatre, New York City.

  1837. An orchestra organized by the Academy of Music in Boston. It
    remained in existence until 1847.

  1838. Philharmonic Society formed in St. Louis.

  1838. The Sacred Music Society of New York City, gave a
    performance of Mendelssohn's oratorio "St. Paul," two years
    after it had been produced at Dusseldorf.

  1838. June. 18. Donizetti's opera "L'Elisir d'Amore" presented at
    the Park Theatre, New York City, with Madame Caradori-Allan,
    Placide, Morley, Macklin and Jones.

  1838. Mr. and Mrs. Seguin, noted singers, arrived in New York City
    and organized an English Opera Company, which traveled
    extensively till 1847.

  1838. Music first taught in the public schools in Boston by Lowell
    Mason.

  1839. April 29. Meyerbeer's opera "Les Huguenots" presented in New
    Orleans.

  1839. The first Musical Convention held in Montpelier, Vt., under
    the direction of G. S. Prouty and Moses E. Cheney.

  1839. Sept. 9. Beethoven's opera "Fidelio" presented in English at
    the Park Theatre, New York City, with Miss Poole, Giubelei,
    Manvers and Martyn.

  1839-1906. John Knowles Paine. American composer. First professor
    of music at Harvard University. Appointed in 1876 (instructor
    1872).

  1839-1909. Dudley Buck. Noted musician. First American composer to
    gain general recognition.

  1840. Mar. 20. Herold's opera "Zampa" presented in New York City.

  1840. Mar. 30. Adam's opera "Le Postillon de Longjumeau" presented
    in New York City.

  1840. Mendelssohn's oratorio "Elijah" sung by the Handel and Haydn
    Society, Boston.

  1840. Beethoven's Fifth Symphony given by the Musical Fund Society
    in Philadelphia.

  1840. John Braham, noted English tenor, visited America.

  1841. The Hutchinson family--camp-meeting singers, known all over
    the United States for many years--began their career.

  1841. Jan. 11. Bellini's opera "Norma" presented by the Woods at
    the Chestnut St. Theatre, Philadelphia.

  1853. Jan. 11. Schumann's First Symphony given by the Musical Fund
    Society (G. Suk, conductor) in Boston.

  1841. Dec. 28. Donizetti's opera "Lucia di Lammermoor" given in
    New Orleans.

  1842. The Chicago Sacred Music Society formed. It was short-lived.

  1842. Jan. 15. Beethoven's Sixth (Pastoral) Symphony given in
    Boston, at a concert of the Academy of Music. Also Cherubini's
    overture to "Les deux Journees."

  1842. Feb. 26. C. M. von Weber's "Jubilee" overture given at a
    concert of the Academy of Music, Boston.

  1842. Mar. 20. Spohr's oratorio "The Last Judgment" given in
    Boston by the Handel and Haydn Society.

  1842. Oct. 31. Handel's oratorio "Israel in Egypt" (music by
    Handel and Rossini) given by the Seguin Opera Company at the
    Park Theatre, New York City.

  1842. Nov. 12. Beethoven's Second Symphony (D) given at the
    Academy of Music, Boston.

  1842. Nov. 22. Handel's oratorio "Acis and Galatea" given by the
    Seguin Company at the Park Theatre, New York City.

  1842. Dec. 7. First concert of the New York Philharmonic Society,
    given at the Apollo rooms, New York City.

        Program:
        Beethoven Symphony No. 5 (conducted by U. C. Hill).
        Weber, Scene from "Oberon" (Mme. Otto).
        Hummel, Quintet for piano and strings.
        Weber, Overture to "Oberon" (conducted by Mr. Etienne).
        Rossini, Duet from "Armida" (Mme. Otto and C. E. Horn).
        Beethoven, Scene from "Fidelio" (C. E. Horn).
        Mozart, Aria from "Belmont and Constance" (Mme. Otto).
        Kalliwoda, New Overture in D (Conducted by Mr. Timm).
        Beethoven's "Eroica" was played at the second concert,
        Feb. 18, 1843. There were only three concerts in the first
        season.

  1842. Dec. 13. Rossini's opera "Guillaume Tell" presented by the
    French Company in New Orleans.

  1843. Jan. 7. Haydn's "Military" Symphony (G major) played at the
    Academy of Music, Boston.

  1843. Feb. 9. Donizetti's opera "La Favorita" presented by the
    French Company in New Orleans.

  1843. Feb. 18. Beethoven's Third Symphony, "Eroica," given by the
    Philharmonic Society, at the Apollo rooms, New York City. (This
    work was played as a Septet by the Musical Fund Society in New
    York City, in 1828.)

  1843. Feb. 26. Rossini's "Stabat Mater" given by the Handel and
    Haydn Society, Boston.

  1843. Mar. 6. Donizetti's opera "La Fille du Regiment" presented
    by the French Company in New Orleans.

  1843. May 25. Auber's opera "L'Ambassadrice,"

  1843. June 17. Auber's opera "Le Domino Noir," and

  1843. July 3. Auber's opera "Pre aux Clerc" presented in New York
    City, at Niblo's Gardens, by the French Company from New
    Orleans.

  1843. Oct. 3. Donizetti's opera "Gemma di Vergi" presented at
    Niblo's Gardens, New York City, with Majocchi, prima donna, and
    Perozzi.

  1843. Nov. 25. Ole Bull, noted Norwegian violinist, made his
    American debut at the Park Theatre, New York City.

  1843. Dec. 15. Donizetti's opera "Marino Faliero" presented at the
    Park Theatre, New York City.

  1843-1863. Philharmonic Concerts, Boston.

  1844. Jan. 15. Mozart's "Jupiter" Symphony (Fourth, in C) given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1844. Feb. 2. Bellini's opera "I Puritani" presented at Palmo's
    Opera House, New York City, with Signora Borghese.

  1844. Mar. 16. Spohr's First Symphony (D minor) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1844. Mar. 18. Bellini's opera "Beatrice di Tenda" presented at
    Palmo's Opera House, New York City, with Majocchi, prima donna.

  1844. April 27. Donizetti's opera "Lucrezia Borgia" presented in
    New Orleans.

  1844. May 6. Donizetti's opera "Anne Boleyn" presented in English
    by the Seguin Company at the Park Theatre, New York City.

  1844. Nov. 16. Ricci's opera "Chiara de Rosenberg" presented at
    Palmo's Opera House, New York City, with Borghese, Antignone,
    Valtellina, and Sanquirico.

  1844. Nov. 16. Beethoven's "Egmont" overture given at the Academy
    of Music, Boston.

  1844. Nov. 16. Mendelssohn's "Hebrides" overture and Beethoven's
    Eighth Symphony (F major) given by the Philharmonic Society, New
    York City, G. Loder conducting.

  1844. Nov. 25. Balfe's opera "The Bohemian Girl" given by the
    Seguin Company in New York City.

  1844. Nov. 28. Donizetti's opera "Belisario" presented at Palmo's
    Opera House, New York City, with Borghese, Pico, Perozzi and
    Tomaso.

  1844. Dec. 14. Beethoven's "Battle of Waterloo" (Wellington)
    Symphony given at the Tabernacle, Broadway, New York City, by a
    "powerful and sufficient orchestra" under U. B. Hill, in aid of
    a fund for the French Free School.

  1844. Dec. 15. Henri Vieuxtemps, noted Belgian violinist, made his
    American debut at a concert at the Park Theatre, New York City.

  1844. Alexandre Artot, French violinist, and Leopold von Meyer,
    German pianist, made their first American tour.

  1844. New York Musical Institute established. It was merged into
    the Harmonic Society in 1849.

  1845. Jan. 11. Spohr's overture to "Jessonda" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1845. Jan. 26. Handel's oratorio "Samson" performed by the Handel
    and Haydn Society, Boston.

  1845. Mar. 1. W. Sterndale Bennett's overture to "Die Najaden"
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1845. April 19. Mendelssohn's "Zum Maerchen von der Schoenen
    Melusine" given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1845. June 4. Production, in English, of William H. Fry's grand
    opera "Leonora" at the Chestnut St. Theatre, Philadelphia,--the
    first grand opera written by an American. The Italian version
    was given at the Academy of Music, New York City, in March,
    1858. The cast at Philadelphia was P. Richings, Ed. Seguin,
    Brunton, Frazer, Mrs. Seguin and Miss Ince. In the New York
    production Sig. Rocco, Gassier, Barratini, Tiberini, Madame de
    la Grange, Madame d'Angri and Madame Morra.

  1845. Nov. 22. Mendelssohn's "Scotch Symphony" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City, G. Loder conducting.

  1845. Dec. 21. Handel's oratorio "Moses in Egypt" given by the
    Handel and Haydn Society, Boston.

  1846. Jan. 17. Mendelssohn's Pianoforte Concerto in G Minor given
    by the Philharmonic Society, New York City, with H. C. Timm as
    soloist.

  1846. Feb. 14. Spohr's overture to "Faust" given at the
    Philharmonic Concerts, Boston.

  1846. Mar. 7. Kalliwoda's First Symphony (D minor) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1846. Mar. 9. Donizetti's opera "Don Pasquale" presented in
    English at the Park Theatre, New York City.

  1846. May 20. Beethoven's Ninth Symphony (D minor) given by the
    Philharmonic Society of New York at Castle Garden, New York
    City.

  1846. Steyermark's Orchestra of twenty men visited America and
    made their first appearance in New York City.

  1846. Oct. 12. Camille Sivori, noted Italian violinist, made his
    American debut in a concert at the Broadway Tabernacle, New York
    City.

  1846. Nov. 21. Berlioz's overture to "King Lear" given by the
    Philharmonic Society of New York City. A. Boucher, conductor.

  1847. Jan. 4. Donizetti's opera "Linda di Chamounix" presented at
    Palmo's Opera House, New York City, with a company including
    Clotilde Barili, Mlle. Pico, Benedetti, Sanquirico and Barili.
    Rapetti, conductor.

  1847. Jan. 9. Deutscher Liederkranz organized in New York City,
    with Dr. Ludwig as conductor.

  1847. Jan. 9. Mendelssohn Festival held at the Castle Garden, New
    York City, under U. C. Hill.

  1847. Jan. 9. The Havana Opera Company arrived in America with
    Luigi Arditi as conductor. The company included Fortunata
    Tedesco, prima donna, Perelli, tenor, Cesar Badiale, bass, also
    Bottesini, the noted double-bass virtuoso.

  1847. Jan. 3. Coppola's opera "Nina Pazza per Amore" presented by
    the Havana Company at the Park Theatre, New York City.

  1847. Mar. 3. Verdi's opera "I Lombardi" presented at Palmo's
    Opera House, New York City, with Narili, Patti, Beneventano.

  1847. April 15. Verdi's opera "Ernani" presented at the Park
    Theatre, New York City, by the Havana Company, with Tedesco,
    Perelli and Novelli. Arditi conducting.

  1847. April 23. First season of Italian opera in Boston, begun
    with "Ernani" at the Howard Athenaeum, given by the Havana Opera
    Company.

  1847. May 13. Musical Fund Society organized in Boston. Lasted
    till 1856.

  1847. June 12. Pacini's opera "Saffo" presented at the Park
    Theatre, New York City, by the Havana Opera Company.

  1847. Aug. 4. Madame Anna Bishop, noted English singer, made her
    American debut at the Park Theatre, New York City.

  1847. Nov. 14. Mozart's Third Symphony (E flat major) and
    Bristow's Concert Overture (Opus 3) given by the Philharmonic
    Society of New York City.

  1847. American debut of Teresa Truffi, soprano, in "Ernani" at the
    Astor Place Opera House, New York City, which was opened in this
    month under the management of Patti, Sanquirico and Pogliano.
    The company included Clotilde and Antonio Barili, Benedetti and
    Sanquirico.

  1847. Dec. 5. Handel's oratorio "Judas Maccabeus" given by the
    Handel and Haydn Society in Boston.

  1847. Mozart Society organized in Chicago, under the direction of
    Frank Lumbard.

  1848. Jan. 8. Beethoven's Seventh Symphony (in F,)
    given by the Musical Fund Society, Boston.

  1848. Feb. 1. Bellini's opera "I Capuletti e Montecchi" presented
    at the Astor Place Opera House, New York City, for the debut of
    Caterina Barilli Patti, as _Romeo_.

  1848. Feb. 14. Mercadante's opera "Il Guiramento" presented at the
    Astor Place Opera House, New York City, with Truffi, Benedetti,
    Rossi and Beneventano.

  1848. April 4. Verdi's opera "Nabucco" presented at the Astor
    Place Opera House, New York City, with Truffi, Amalia Patti.

  1848. April 11. Schumann's secular cantata, "Paradise and the
    Peri," given in New York City, by the Musical Institute, Henry
    C. Timm conducting.

  1848. April 29. Spohr's Symphony in E flat, given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1848. May 4. Wallace's opera "Maritana" given by the Seguin
    Company in Philadelphia.

  1848. May 14. Mendelssohn's "Midsummer Night's Dream," music given
    by the Germania Orchestra in New York City.

  1848. Oct. 2. American debut of Maurice Strakosch, noted conductor
    and impresario, at the First Grand Musical Festival of the
    season, at the Broadway Tabernacle, New York City, given by the
    "Italian Opera Company of the United States."

  1848. Oct. 5. The Germania Orchestra, consisting of German
    revolutionary refugees, organized and gave their first concert
    in America at Niblo's Garden, New York City.

  1848. Nov. 16. Gungl's Orchestra of twenty-five players gave their
    first concert in New York City, at the Broadway Tabernacle,
    after which they made a tour of the United States, playing
    chiefly dance-music.

  1848. Dec. 2. W. Sterndale Bennett's overture to "Die Waldnymphe"
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1848. Edouard Remenyi, noted Hungarian violinist, made first
    American tour, and Richard Hoffman was the first noted pianist
    to visit Chicago.

  1848. Musical Convention held in Chicago for the first time.

  1848. During this season the Havana Opera Company again visited
    America bringing Steffanone, Bosio, Tedesco (soprani); Vietto
    (contralto); Salvi, Bettini and Lorini (tenori); Badiali, Setti,
    Marini, and Coletti (bassi)--the best company heard in America
    up to that time.

        Also Max Maretzek arrived in New York and began his
      career as impresario. His company included Madame
      Laborde, and Truffi (soprani); Amalia Patti (contralto);
      Benedetti and Arnoldi (tenori); Giubeli, Rossi and Salvatore
      Patti (bassi). Also, later, Teresa Parodi. His first
      public appearance was on Oct. 5, at the Chestnut Street
      Theatre, Philadelphia, conducting "Norma."

  1849. Nov. 24. Beethoven's Fourth Symphony (B flat major) given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City, also Mendelssohn's
    Violin Concerto (E minor) with Joseph Burke as soloist.

  1849. Dec. 10. Donizetti's opera "Marie de Rohan" presented in New
    York City, on which occasion Giuletta Perrini, Italian soprano,
    made her American debut supported by Patti, Forti, Giubelei and
    Beneventano.

  1849. Dec. 16. Donizetti's opera "Il Poliuto" performed as an
    oratorio (The Martyrs) by the Handel and Haydn Society, Boston.

  1849. Saengerfest held in Cincinnati, O.

  1849. Musikverein founded in Milwaukee, Wis.

  1849. The Artists' Union Opera Company formed in New York City,
    including Bosio, De Vries, Bettini, Lorini, Badiali, and
    Coletti. They gave what they claimed was the first performance
    in America of Meyerbeer's opera "Roberto il Diavolo." (See April
    7, 1834).

  1849-1874. Sacred Harmonic Society, New York City.




CHAPTER V

1850-1875


During this period musical events moved forward quite rapidly, and
though there was a pause during the years of the Civil War--from 1861 to
1865--after that time increasing energy was in evidence.

Possibly one of the most significant events was the establishment of
"Dwight's Journal of Music," in Boston, the first journal in America
devoted entirely to musical matters. It was published every two weeks,
and while the greater part of the space was devoted to musical affairs
in Europe, yet there were letters and reports from various centres in
this country, which make the Journal something of a history in itself.
Moreover, John S. Dwight helped very materially in bringing to the
American people something in the way of musical criticism, which was
sadly needed. Indeed, anyone who takes the trouble to look over the
reports of concerts and operas in the daily papers of these times will
be surprised at the absurdity of the comments on the performances of the
noted musicians. Ritter, for instance, quotes a criticism of a
pianoforte recital where the critic was much pleased by a "double run on
the chromatic scale, in which the semitones were distinctly heard."
With singers the chief point was whether the singer of this season could
sing louder than the singer of last season. John S. Dwight was the
pioneer of musical criticism in America,--an intellectual man, one of
the noted band of idealists who were in the "Brook Farm" movement.
"Dwight's Journal of Music" went out of existence in 1881. Musical
criticism has since become a specialized art.

Musical societies were multiplying,--Cincinnati and Milwaukee had them,
and in Chicago the "Philharmonic Society" was organized. In 1850 also
the Worcester (Mass.) "Festivals" began, and in 1858 the Peabody
Institute concerts, in Baltimore.

In 1858 the "Mendelssohn Quintet" was formed, and for many years toured
the country giving concerts of a high standard, and doing much to raise
the level of musical taste. This organization had its beginning in
Boston, but it traveled so widely that it may be said to have belonged
to the nation.

Towards the end of this period the "Apollo Club" was organized in
Chicago, and it is today one of the most excellent clubs in America. The
following year the "Cecilia Society," in Boston, was organized and
likewise still exists and flourishes. But these are only a few.

The American composer was beginning to show himself--perhaps not yet
very brilliantly in comparison to the great men of Europe--but he was
beginning to be heard from. William H. Frye, besides his two operas,
composed several symphonies, which were played by Jullien's Band in
1853. Also a "Grand Symphony" in 1855 and "The Pilgrims' Cantata" by C.
C. Perkins, were performed in Boston, and we have record of an oratorio,
"The Cities of the Plains," by Dawley, in 1855. Apart from these efforts
the American composer seems to have been inconspicuous. In fact there
were no facilities for the study of music or for the hearing of music
which could be compared, as a training school for composers, with the
musical centres of Europe, so that the efforts of these earlier
composers may be considered, in some respects, premature, and prompted
by energy and ambition rather than by scientific preparation.

The story of grand opera of this period is one of perpetual striving for
the unattainable. In Chicago the first performance of grand opera was
given in 1850. Chicago is now a rival of New York in matters of opera.

San Francisco heard its first opera in 1853. The gold fever of 1849 drew
people of all kinds to California, and among them were musicians. Henri
Herz, the French pianist, reached California in 1849 when the excitement
was at its highest, and he gives an interesting account of his
adventures. It may also be well to mention here Signora Biscaccianti,
who went to San Francisco in 1852, and was there more or less till 1864.
Signora Biscaccianti was one of the first American singers to achieve a
measure of success in Europe. She was the daughter of a musician named
Ostinelli, was born in Boston, where she met with some success as a
singer, went to New York and thence to Europe. Another American who was,
perhaps, better known in her own country was Miss Isabella Hinkley who
appeared in 1861, but another who appeared in New York in the same year,
became still better known and was prominent for many years, Clara Louise
Kellogg. Eighteen hundred and fifty-nine was the year of Adelina Patti's
debut.

The list of great singers who were imported during this period is long.
We can but touch on it,--there was Jenny Lind in 1850, then came
Marietta Alboni in 1851. Two years later Sontag, and the next year Grisi
and Mario. In 1865 came Parepa Rosa, and in 1870 Christine Nilsson. In
1873, Maurel and Campanini. In 1855 Brignoli appeared, and was for many
years a great popular favorite.

We find efforts in New York to promote German opera. Operas by
Germans--"Fidelio" for instance--had been heard together with operas by
Italians, and others, but now Wagner came above the horizon, and German
opera began to mean Wagner. So we find a "Tannhaeuser" and "Lohengrin" in
New York in 1859,--quite inadequate performances according to the
opinion handed down to posterity,--but yet, performances. They were
followed in 1862 by "Der Fliegende Hollaender," all worthy but
inadequate efforts. Maretzek and Strakosch were the chief figures in
grand opera during this period, but there were spasmodic efforts by
others which need not be recorded.

Pianists were not so numerous as later. Alfred Jaell had appeared and,
in 1854, Dr. William Mason returned from Europe and established himself
in New York, but was not known as one of the traveling virtuosi. He had
a great influence in musical education, for many years. Anna Mehlig
visited America in 1869.

In 1862 Louis M. Gottschalk, a native of New Orleans, returned to
America after a brilliant career in Europe, and he appears to have been
the first American to have made a career as a piano virtuoso.

Violinists were few in comparison to singers,--Miska Hauser, Pablo
Sarasate, in 1850, and Camilla Urso in 1852. Then a space of twenty
years without any great virtuoso.

An important matter in the musical life of America was the establishment
of conservatories. There had already been the Academy of Music in
Boston, which enrolled twenty-two hundred pupils the first year, but the
conservatory idea appears to have developed just after the Civil War,
for we find in 1865 a conservatory of music established with Oberlin
College, in 1871 Illinois College at Jacksonville followed suit, and in
1873 Northwestern University. In the meantime, in 1867, we find the
Boston Conservatory, under Julius Eichberg, the New England
Conservatory, under Eben Tourjee, the Cincinnati Conservatory, and the
Chicago Academy of Music, which became the Chicago Musical College,--and
in 1877, a couple of years after this period, Syracuse University added
a conservatory.

  1850. Jan. 12. Mendelssohn's "Meerstille und Glueckliche Fahrt"
    and "Capriccio Brillante," with William Scharfenberg as
    soloist, given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1850. Jan. 19. Beethoven's Third Pianoforte Concerto given by the
    Musical Fund Society, Boston, with G. F. Hayter, soloist.

  1850. Mar. 9. Handel's oratorio "Jephtha" given by the Musical
    Education Society, Boston, under G. J. Webb and Lowell Mason.

  1850. Mar. 11. American debut of Signora Steffanone in "Norma" at
    Niblo's Garden, New York. City, with the Havana Company.

  1850. Mar. 18. American debut of Angiolina Bosio, soprano, at
    Niblo's Garden, New York City, in "Lucrezia Borgia" with the
    Havana company.

  1850. Mar. 23. C.C. Perkins's "Grand Symphony" given by the
    Musical Fund Society, Boston.

  1850. April 1. Meyerbeer's opera "L'Etoile du Nord" presented at
    the Opera House, New Orleans, La.

  1850. April 2. Meyerbeer's opera "Il Profeta" presented at the
    Opera House, New Orleans, La.

  1850. April 16. Verdi's opera "Attila" presented at Niblo's
    Garden, New York City, by the Havana Company with Fortunata
    Tedesco, Corradi-Setti, Marini and Lorini.

  1850. April 24. Verdi's opera "Macbeth" presented at Niblo's
    Garden, New York City, with Bosio and Badiali in the leading
    parts.

  1850. June 24. Meyerbeer's opera "Les Huguenots" presented in New
    York City, by the Havana Company. (See New Orleans April 29,
    1839.)

  1850. Sept. 11. American debut of Jenny Lind (in concert) at the
    Castle Garden, New York City. Her first selection was "Casta
    Diva" from "Norma."

  1850. Oct. 24. First concert of the Chicago Philharmonic
    Orchestra, organized by Julius Dyhrenfurth. (On Feb. 2, 1853,
    the Legislature of Illinois incorporated the Society by an act
    entitled "An Act to Encourage the Science of Fiddling.")

  1850. Nov. 4. American debut of Teresa Parodi at the Astor Place
    Opera House, New York City, as _Norma_, under Maretzek.

  1850. Nov. 22. Donizetti's opera "Parisina" presented at the Astor
    Place Opera House, New York City, by Maretzek, with Truffi,
    Forti, Rossi and Beneventano.

  1850. Dec. 7. Beethoven's "Leonora Overture" No. 3, given at a
    concert of the Musical Fund Society, Boston. G. J. Webb
    conducting.

  1850. Dec. 21. Mozart's Symphony in G minor given by the Musical
    Fund Society, Boston, at Tremont Temple, from a manuscript
    presented by C. C. Perkins.

  1850. First performance of grand opera in Chicago given during
    this season,--"La Sonnambula," with Elisa Brienti, Manvers and
    Giubelei in the leading parts.

  1850. Miska Hauser and Pablo Sarasate, noted violinists, made
    their first American tours.

  1850. Worcester (Mass.) Festival Association organized.
    Reorganized in 1866, and chartered in 1872.

  1851. Jan. 3. Production of Maurice Strakosch's opera "Giovanni di
    Napoli" at the Astor Place Opera House, New York City.

  1851. Jan. 11. Schubert's Symphony in C major given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City. Th. Eisfeld conducting.

  1851. Sept. 13. American debut of Catherine Hayes, noted singer,
    at a concert in Tripler Hall, New York City.

  1851. Nov. 15. Mendelssohn's "Italian Symphony" given at a concert
    of the Musical Fund Society in Tremont Temple, Boston. G. J.
    Webb conducting.

  1851. Dec. 7. American operatic debut of Marietta Alboni, great
    contralto, in "La Cenerentola," with Sangiovanni, Barili and
    Rovere at the Astor Place Opera House, New York City. She had
    appeared in concert at Tripler Hall, June 23.

  1852. April 17. Mendelssohn's Pianoforte Concerto in D minor,
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City, with W.
    Scharfenberg as soloist.

  1852. Oct. 15. American debut of Alfred Jaell, noted pianist, at
    Tripler Hall, New York City.

  1852. Oct. 27. Verdi's opera "Luisa Miller" presented at the
    Chestnut St. Theatre, Philadelphia, with Caroline Richings and
    Madame Bishop in the leading parts.

  1852. Oct. 29. Camilla Urso, noted violinist, made her American
    debut at a concert in Tripler Hall, New York City.

  1852. Nov. 1. Flotow's opera "Martha" given in New York City, with
    Madame Anna Bishop in the title-role, under direction of Bochsa.

  1852. Nov. 13. Gade's "Ossian Overture" given by the Philharmonic
    Society, New York City.

  1852. Nov. 20. Music Hall, Boston, dedicated with a concert given
    by the Handel and Haydn Society and the Musical Fund Society
    combined.

  1852. Dec. 12. Gade's First Symphony (E minor) given by the
    Germania Orchestra in Boston.

  1852-1859. Chicago Maennergesang-Verein.

  1852-1881. Dwight's Journal of Music, Boston. The first American
    Musical Journal.

  1853. Jan. 1. Haydn's Eighth Symphony given by the Musical Fund
    Society, Boston. F. Suck conducting.

  1853. Jan. 10. American debut of Henrietta Sontag, noted soprano,
    in "La Figlia del Reggimento" supported by Badiali and
    Pozzolini, at Niblo's Garden, New York City.

  1853. Jan. 12. American debut of Signor Rocco, famous buffo.

  1853. June. First performance of a symphony in
    Chicago,--Beethoven's Second, given by the Germania Orchestra.

  1853. Sept. 26. First concert given by Louis A. Jullien, in New
    York City, beginning an American tour. During the visit of
    Jullien and his band they produced the following works of
    William H. Frye: "Christmas, or Santa Claus," "The Breaking
    Heart," "Childe Harold," and "A Day in the Country."

  1853. Nov. 19. Wagner's overture to "Rienzi" played, from MS. by
    the Germania Orchestra in Boston.

  1853. Nov. 22. Beethoven's Violin Concerto (first movement only)
    played in Boston, with August Fries as soloist. (Complete work
    given in 1859 with Julius Eichberg, soloist.)

  1853. Nov. 26. Spohr's ninth symphony, "The Seasons," given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1853. The first performance of Italian opera in San Francisco,
    Cal., was given this season by Madame Thillon,--"Ernani."

  1853. Louis Moreau Gottschalk, the first American pianist of
    international renown, returned to America and began concert
    touring. In three seasons he gave more than 1100 concerts.

  1853. The pianoforte manufacturing house of Steinway and Sons
    established in New York City.

  1854. Jan. 14. Schumann's Second Symphony (C major) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1854. Feb. 4. Beethoven's Fourth Pianoforte Concerto (B flat)
    given by the Germania Orchestra in Boston with Robert Heller as
    soloist.

  1854. Mar. 4. Beethoven's Fifth Pianoforte Concerto (E flat) given
    by the Germania Orchestra in Boston, with Robert Heller as
    soloist.

  1854. April 22. F. Schneider's Twentieth Symphony given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1854. Oct. 2. Opening of the Academy of Music, New York City. A
    performance of "Norma," with Grisi and Mario in the leading
    roles. They had previously made their American debuts in
    "Lucrezia Borgia" at Castle Garden under Hackett's management.
    (The Academy of Music was the home of opera until 1866, and was
    frequently used for this purpose until 1896.)

  1854. Oct. 9. Louisa Pyne, noted English singer, made her American
    debut as _Amina_ in "La Sonnambula," at the Broadway Theatre,
    New York City.

  1854-1910. William H. Sherwood, noted American pianist and
    teacher.

  1855. Feb. 13. American debut of Madame F. Vestvali, as Arsace at
    the Metropolitan Theatre, New York City, with Grisi and Mario.

  1855. Feb. 17. Haydn's Fifth Symphony given by the Musical Fund
    Society, Boston, and together with the Handel and Haydn Society,
    C. C. Perkins's "The Pilgrims' Cantata."

  1855. Mar. 12. American debut of Luigi Brignoli, Italian operatic
    tenor, as _Edgardo_ in "Lucia di Lammermoor" supported by
    Vestvali, Amodio and Rocco,--in New York City.

  1855. April 30. Verdi's opera "Il Trovatore" presented in New York
    City, with Vestvali, Steffanone, Brignoli and Amodio, at the
    Academy of Music.

  1855. May 8. American debut of Madame Anna de la Grange in "Il
    Barbiere" at the Academy of Music, New York City.

  1855. Sept. 27. Production of George Bristow's opera "Rip van
    Winkle" at Niblo's Garden, New York City, by the Pyne and
    Harrison Opera Company.

  1855. Oct. 1. American debut of Madame Nantier-Didier as _Arsace_
    in "Semiramide" at the Academy of Music, New York City.

  1855. Oct. 6. The first attempt at German opera made in New York
    City, at Niblo's Garden, under Julius Ungher. "Der Freyschuetz,"
    "Martha," "Masaniello," and "Czar und Zimmerman" were presented
    by a company including Carolina Lehman, Madame d'Ormy, Madame
    Seidenberg, Schraubstadter, Quint and Vineke.

  1855. Oct. 30. Rossini's opera "Semiramide" presented by Maretzek
    at the Academy of Music, New York City.

  1855. Nov. 18. Handel's oratorio "Solomon" given by the Handel and
    Haydn Society, Boston.

  1855. Dec. 8. An American oratorio, "The Cities of the Plain," by
    F. T. S. Darley, produced by the Harmonia Sacred Music Society
    in Philadelphia.

  1855-1863. Philharmonic Society, Boston, Carl Zerrahn, conductor.

  1855-6. Sigismund Thalberg, noted pianist, and Henri Vieuxtemps,
    great violinist, made a concert-tour in America.

  1856. Mar. 17. Adelaide Phillips, noted contralto, made her
    operatic (American) debut as _Azucena_ in "Il Trovatore," in New
    York City.

  1856. Oct. Flotow's opera "Stradella" presented at Niblo's Garden,
    New York City.

  1856. Dec. 3. Verdi's opera "La Traviata" presented at the Academy
    of Music, New York City, with Madame de la Grange, Brignoli and
    Amodio.

  1856. Dec. 29. Beethoven's opera "Fidelio" presented in German at
    the Broadway Theatre, New York City, when Mademoiselle Johansen
    made her American debut in the title role. (Ritter states that
    this opera was given in English by the Seguin Company on Sept.
    9, 1856--the first representation in America.)

  1856. The Academy of Music in Philadelphia opened.

  1856. The Cecilia Society and Harmonic Society organized in
    Cincinnati, O.

  1856-7. During this season an orchestra, under Carl Bergmann,
    giving concerts at the City Assembly rooms, New York City, is
    said to have performed for the first time in America:

        Beethoven's Seventh Symphony--in A.
        Mozart's Symphony in D major.
        Haydn's Symphony in G major (see 1843, Jan. 7).
        Beethoven's Pianoforte Concertos in E flat and G.

  1857. Jan. 3. Wagner's "Faust Overture" given by the Philharmonic
    Society, Boston, Carl Zerrahn, conductor.

  1857. Jan. 18. Mozart's "Requiem" given by the Handel and Haydn
    Society in Boston.

  1857. Jan. 21. Strakosch appointed manager of the Academy of
    Music, New York City.

  1857. Jan. 24. Berlioz's "Roman Carnival" overture given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1857. Feb. 7. Schumann's Symphony in D given by the Philharmonic
    Society, New York City.

  1857. Feb. 23. American debut of Marietta Gazzaniga as _Leonora_
    in "Il Trovatore" at the Academy of Music, Philadelphia. She
    appeared in New York City as _Violetta_ in "La Traviata" on
    April 13.

  1857. Nov. 2. Debut of Madame d'Angri as _Arsace_ in "Semiramide"
    at Castle Garden, New York City.

  1859. Nov. 19. Wagner's prelude to "Lohengrin" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1856. April 27. Schumann's "Manfred Overture" given at a concert
    given by Carl Bergmann, New York.

  1857. Nov. 30. American debut of Carl Formes, noted German basso,
    as _Bertram_ in "Roberto," at the Academy of Music, New York
    City.

  1857. Dec. 30. American debut of Madame Anna Caradori, as
    _Fidelio_, at the Academy of Music, New York City.

  1857-65. Chicago Musical Union. C. M. Cady, conductor.

  1857. An orchestra was established in Brooklyn, N. Y., with
    Theodore Eisfeld as conductor. It is claimed that this orchestra
    introduced to America Beethoven's Third and Seventh Symphonies,
    and Mendelssohn's Fourth.

  1858. Jan. 9. Nicolai's overture to "The Merry Wives of Windsor"
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1858. Mar. 6. Hiller's Symphony in F, given by the Philharmonic
    Society, New York City.

  1858. April 24. Schumann's Overture, Scherzo and Finale given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1858. Oct. 20. American debut of Maria Piccolomini, noted soprano,
    as _Violetta_, in "La Traviata" at the Academy of Music, New
    York City.

  1858. Nov. 1. During a season of opera begun on this date and
    ended Jan. 30, 1859, the following operas were presented in New
    Orleans, La., probably for the first time in America:

        Ambroise Thomas' "Le Caid."
        Donizetti's "La Favorita."
        Halevy's "Jaquarita l'Indienne."
        Grisar's "Les Amours du Diable."
        Adam's "Chalet" and "Si J'Etais Roy."
        Halevy's "La Juive."
        Auber's "Les Diamans de Couronne."
        Halevy's "Reine de Chypre."

  1858. Nov. 23. Mozart's opera "Nozze di Figaro" presented in
    Italian at the Academy of Music, New York City, with Carl Formes
    as _Figaro_, supported by Madame von Berkel, Ghioni,
    Piccolomini, etc.

  1858. Nov. 28. Gade's Fifth Symphony given by the Philharmonic Society,
    New York.

  1858. The Mendelssohn Quintet organized in Boston--August Fries,
    first violin, Francis Riha, second violin, Edward Lehman, viola
    and flute, Thomas Ryan, viola and clarinet, Wulf Fries,
    violoncello. This was a pioneer organization in Chamber Music,
    and traveled extensively for many years.

  1858. The French Opera Company from New Orleans appeared in
    Chicago.

  1859. Feb. 26. Mozart's Pianoforte Concerto in E flat major given
    at the Philharmonic concerts, Boston, with B. J. Lang as
    soloist.

  1859. Mar. 26. Schumann's Pianoforte Concerto in A minor (Op. 54)
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City, with S. B.
    Mills as soloist.

  1859. Mar. 26. Beethoven's music to Goethe's drama "Egmont" given
    entire at the Philharmonic Concerts, Boston, with readings from
    the drama by Mrs. Barrow.

  1859. April 4. Wagner's opera "Tannhaeuser" presented at the Stadt
    Theatre, New York City, under Carl Bergmann, with Madame
    Seidenberg as _Elizabeth_, Pickaneser as _Tannhaeuser_, Lehmann
    as _Wolfram_, and the Arion Society as chorus.

  1859. April 20. Liszt's symphonic poem "Les Preludes" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1859. May 25. Donizetti's opera "Il Poliuto" presented at the
    Academy of Music, New York City, with Piccolomini, Brignoli,
    Barili.

  1859. Aug. 27. Wagner's opera "Lohengrin" presented at the Stadt
    Theatre, New York City, under Carl Bergmann, with Seidenberg,
    Pickaneser and Lehmann.

  1859. Nov. 7. Verdi's opera "I Vespri Sicilienne" presented at the
    Academy of Music, New York City, with Brignoli and Colson.

  1859. Nov. 24. Operatic debut of Adelina Patti at the Academy of
    Music, New York City, as _Lucia_, supported by Brignoli.

  1859. New French Opera House built in New Orleans, La.

  1859. Patrick Sarsfield Gilmore organized his noted band in
    Boston, Mass.

  1860. Jan. 14. Spohr's Double Symphony, for two orchestras, given
    in Boston.

  1860. Jan. 27. Rossini's opera "Otello" presented in New Orleans,
    La.

  1860. Feb. 11. Lachner's "Festival Overture" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1860. Mar. 3. Beethoven's overture "Die Weihe des Hautes" given
    by the Philharmonic Society in Boston, Carl Zerrahn conducting.

  1860. Dec. 22. Liszt's seventh symphonic poem, "Fest-Klaenge," given
    by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1860. Mar. 19. Verdi's opera "Rigoletto" presented in New Orleans,
    La.

  1860. Mar. 24. Liszt's symphonic poem "Tasso" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1860. May 31. Verdi's opera "I Masnadieri" presented by Maretzek
    at the Academy of Music, New York City, with Oliviera, Guerra
    and Luisia.

  1860. Sept. 19. American debut of Pauline Colson in "I Vespri
    Sicilienne" at the Academy of Music, New York City.

  1860. Sept. 27. Pacini's opera "Medea" presented at Niblo's
    Garden, New York City.

  1860-1868. Chicago Philharmonic Society (reorganized) under Hans
    Balatka.

  1860. An Oratorio Society organized by R. Herold in San Francisco,
    Cal.

  1860-1861. The Briggs House Concerts given in Chicago--the first
    Chamber Music Concerts in that city. Henri de Clerque, first
    violin; Buderbach, violoncello; Paul Becker, piano.

  1869. Jan. 9. Liszt's symphonic poem "Ce qu'on entend sur le
    Montagne" given by the Philharmonic Society in New York City.

  1861. Jan. 23. American debut of Isabella Hinkley as _Lucia_ at
    the Academy of Music, New York City, supported by Steffani,
    Coletti.

  1861. Feb. 3. Schumann's Third Symphony (E flat major) given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1861. Feb. 11. Verdi's opera "Un Ballo in Maschera" given at the
    Academy of Music, New York City, with Colson, Adelaide Phillips,
    Hinckley, Brignoli, Ferri.

  1861. Feb. 27. American debut of Clara Louise Kellogg as _Gilda_
    in "Rigoletto" at the Academy of Music, New York City, under
    Grau and de Vivo.

  1861. Mar. 16. Mozart's Eighth Pianoforte Concerto (in D) given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City, with Richard Hoffman,
    as soloist.

  1861. April 20. Mendelssohn's "First Walpurgis Night" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1861. Masse's opera "Les Noces de Jeanette" with Kellogg, Elena,
    Mancini, Debreuil, given at the Academy of Music, Philadelphia,
    Pa., also Donizetti's "Betley," with Miss Hinkley, Brignoli,
    Lusini.

  1861. Nov. 9. Chopin's Second Pianoforte Concerto given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City, with S. B. Mills as
    soloist.

  1861-1908. Edward MacDowell. Noted American pianist, composer and
    teacher.

  1862. Jan. 30. Mendelssohn's "Hymn of Praise" given in the Old
    South Church, Boston, under the direction of B. J. Lang.

  1862. Feb. Brahms's First Serenade given by the Philharmonic Society,
    New York.

  1862. Mar. 8. Schubert's "Grand Fantasia" given by William Mason
    at a concert of the Philharmonic Society, Boston.

  1862. May 13. Music of Wagner's opera "Der Fliegende Hollaender"
    given at Irving Hall, New York City, under the direction of
    Theodore Thomas.

  1862. Sept. 18. Auber's "Grand Inauguration March" given at a
    concert in New York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1862. Sept. 22. Operatic debut of Carlotta Patti as _Amina_ in "La
    Sonnambula," supported by Miss Stockton, Sbriglia and Susini, in
    New York City.

  1862. Oct. 10. Mozart's opera "Entfuehrung aus dem Serail"
    presented in New York City, at Wallack's Theatre, under the
    direction of Carl Anschutz.

  1862. Nov. 14. Meyerbeer's opera "Dinorah" presented in New York
    City.

  1862. Teresa Carreno, great Venezuelan pianist, first appeared in
    New York City, as a child pianist.

  1862-1901. Ethelbert Nevin. Song composer.

  1863. Mar. 7. Berlioz's "Corsair Overture" given in New York City,
    by Theodore Thomas.

  1863. April 6. Petrella's opera "Ione" presented at the Academy of
    Music, New York City, with Medori, Sulzer, Mazzolini, and
    Bellini, under Maretzek.

  1863. April 15. Verdi's opera "I due Foscari" presented at the
    Academy of Music, New York City, with Medori, Mazzolini, Bellini
    and Coletti, under Maretzek.

  1863. April. William H. Fry's opera "Notre Dame de Paris" produced
    at the Academy of Music, Philadelphia.

  1863. May 4. Verdi's opera "Aroldo" presented at the Academy of
    Music, New York City, under Maretzek, with Mazzolini, Bellini
    and Coletti.

  1863. Nov. 2. Inauguration of the great organ in Music Hall,
    Boston, when Charlotte Cushman, Lyman Wheeler, and Mrs. J. F.
    Houston took leading parts in the ceremonies.

  1863. Nov. 7. Ferdinand Hiller's Second Pianoforte Concerto (in A)
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1863. Nov. 11. Peri's opera "Judith" presented at the Academy of
    Music, New York City, by Maretzek, with Medori, Mazzolini,
    Bellini and Biachi.

  1863. Weber's opera "Euryanthe" said to have been presented at
    Wallack's Theatre, New York, by Carl Anschutz.

  1863. Nov. 18. Gounod's opera "Faust" presented at the Academy of
    Music, Philadelphia, by the German Opera Company. Was given in
    New York, Nov. 26.

  1863-1872. The Mendelssohn Society, New York City.

  1864. Jan. 30. Liszt's "Faust Symphony" (F minor) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City, assisted by the Arion
    Society.

  1864. The first complete performance of Haydn's oratorio, "The
    Seasons" given in Boston, under the direction of B. J. Lang.

  1864. Nov. 4. American debut of Jennie van Zandt, as _Gilda_ in
    "Rigoletto" at the Academy of Music, New York City.

  1864. Nov. 25. Donizetti's opera "Don Sebastian" presented at the
    Academy of Music, New York City.

  1864. Dec. 3. Lachner's Suite in D minor given by Theodore Thomas,
    in New York City, also the second part of Berlioz' dramatic
    symphony "Romeo et Juliette."

  1864. Great Band Festival in New Orleans, La., under P. S.
    Gilmore.

  1865. Jan. 13. Bach's Toccata in F given in New York City by
    Theodore Thomas.

  1865. Feb. 18. Raff's symphony "An das Vaterland," and Beethoven's
    Triple Concerto, for piano, violin and cello, given in New York
    City by Theodore Thomas.

  1865. Feb. 18. Beethoven's Second Pianoforte Concerto (B flat)
    given by the Brooklyn Philharmonic Society.

  1865. Feb. 24. Verdi's opera "La Forza del Destino" presented in
    New York City, with Carozzi-Zucchi, Massimiliani and Bellini.

  1865. Mar. 4. Hohnstock's overture, "Hail Columbia," given by
    Theodore Thomas in Brooklyn, N. Y.

  1865. Mar. 11. Haydn's First Symphony (E flat) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1865. April 8. Mozart's Symphony Concertante for violin and
    viola,--Bach's Passacaglia,--and Schumann's overture to "Die
    Braut von Messina" given in New York City by Theodore Thomas.

  1865. April 20. Crosby Opera House in Chicago, dedicated.
    Performances were given there by a company brought by Jacob Grau
    and including Clara Louise Kellogg and Zucchi, sopranos;
    Morensi, Fischer and Zapucci, contraltos; Massimiliani,
    Mazzolini and Lotti, tenors; Bellini, Orlandini, Lorini and
    Debreuil, baritones; Susini, Colletti, Muller, Perni and
    Ximenes, basses, and Carl Bergmann, conductor.

  1865. Sept. 11. First appearance in America (in concert) of Madame
    Parepa-Rosa, at Steinway Hall, New York City.

  1865. Nov. 4. Liszt's symphonic poem "Mazeppa" given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1865. Dec. 1. Meyerbeer's opera "L'Africaine" given at the Academy
    of Music, New York City, with Carozzi-Zucchi as _Selika_ and
    Mazzoni as _Vasco da Gama_. Carl Bergmann, conductor.

  1865. Dec. 2. Liszt's Pianoforte Concerto in E flat given in New
    York City, under Theodore Thomas.

  1865. Dec. 28. The first concert of the Harvard Musical
    Association in Boston. Mozart's Symphony in G minor was
    performed.

  1865. Germania Maennerchor organized in Chicago, Ill.

  1865. Peabody Institute Concerts established in Baltimore, Md.

  1865. Conservatory of Music opened in connection with Oberlin
    College (Ohio) which was founded in 1834.

  1865. Opera given in San Francisco, Cal., by a company including
    Morelli, Barilli, Sbriglia and Adelaide Phillips. Twenty-four
    operas were presented.

  1866. Jan. 13. Beethoven's Choral Fantasia, and Bargiel's Symphony
    in C, given in New York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1866. Jan. 27. Berlioz'a "Fantastic Symphony" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1866. Feb. 10. Mozart's Concerto in E flat, for two pianos, and
    Weber's "Invitation to the Dance" given by Theodore Thomas, in
    New York City.

  1866. Feb. 28. Cherubini's overture to "Anacreon" given in Boston,
    by the Harvard Musical Association.

  1866. Mar. 1. Schumann's overture to "Genoveva" given in Boston,
    by the Harvard Musical Association.

  1866. Mar. 10. Introduction to Wagner's opera "Tristan und Isolde"
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1859. Jan. 8. Schubert's overture to "Fierabras" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York.

  1866. Aug. 29. Mozart's Andante, Variations, and Minuetto, and his
    "Turkish March" given by Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1866. Oct. 13. Minnie Hauck, noted American soprano, made her
    debut in "L'Etoile du Nord" at the Academy of Music, New York
    City, before going to Europe.

  1866. Oct. 20. Vorspiel to Wagner's opera "Die Meistersinger"
    given by Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1866. Oct. 27. J. J. Abert's First Symphony, and Schubert's
    "Reiter March" given by Theodore Thomas, in Brooklyn, N. Y.

  1866. Nov. 17. Liszt's "Nachtlicher Zug," from "Faust," given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City, and Bristow's "Columbus
    Overture" produced at the same concert.

  1866. Dec. 2. Beethoven's Overture in C (Opus III), and Grimm's
    Suite in Canon Form given in New York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1866. Dec. 8. Liszt's "Mephisto Waltz" given in Brooklyn, N. Y.,
    by Theodore Thomas.

  1866. The Summer Night Concerts at Terrace Gardens, New York City,
    were inaugurated this year, by Theodore Thomas.

  1867. Jan. 12. Raff's Suite in C (Opus 101) given in New York
    City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1867. Jan. 19. Berlioz's "Romeo et Juliette" overture given by the
    Brooklyn Philharmonic Society, under Theodore Thomas.

  1867. Feb. 7. Handel's oratorio "Jephtha" given by the Handel and
    Haydn Society, in Boston.

  1867. Mar. 13. Entr'acte from Schubert's "Rosamunde" given in New
    York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1867. Mar. 18. American operatic debut of Euphrosyne Parepa-Rosa,
    great soprano, in "Il Trovatore" at the Academy of Music, New
    York City.

  1867. April 3. Petrella's opera "Il Carnival di Venezia" presented
    at the Academy of Music, New York City.

  1867. April 3. Molique's Concerto for Violoncello given by the
    Philharmonic Society, Brooklyn, N. Y., under Theodore Thomas.

  1867. July 1. J. Strauss's "Blue Danube" waltz, and the ballet
    music from Gounod's opera "The Queen of Sheba," given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1867. July 5. Liszt's march "Vom Fels zum Meer" given by Theodore
    Thomas, and on the 7th Strauss's waltz "From the Mountains," and
    the overture to Schubert's "Rosamunde," in New York City.

  1867. July 14. J. Strauss's "Buergesin" and polka mazurka "Lob der
    Frauen" given in New York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1867. Aug. 13. Schumann's "Traeumerei" given for the first time in
    America by Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1867. Oct. 7. Bach's Third Suite, in D, given by Theodore Thomas,
    in New York City.

  1867. Oct. 26. Schubert's "Unfinished Symphony" given in New York
    City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1867. Nov. 9. Mendelssohn's "Trumpet Overture"; Haydn's theme and
    variations on "Kaiser Franz Hymn"; and Berlioz's overture to
    "Benvenuto Cellini" given by the Brooklyn Philharmonic Society,
    Theodore Thomas conducting.

  1867. Nov. 21. Cherubini's overture to "Medea" given in Boston, by
    the Harvard Musical Association.

  1867. Dec. 14. Gounod's opera "Romeo et Juliette" presented at the
    Academy of Music, New York City, by Maretzek, with Minne Hauck
    as _Juliette_.

  1867. Dec. 14. Vieuxtemps's Violin Concerto in D given by the
    Brooklyn Philharmonic Society, with Camilla Urso as soloist.

  1867, Dec. 15. Beethoven's "Prometheus" music given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1867. Dec. 21. Ritter's overture to "Othello" given in New York
    City, by the Philharmonic Society.

  1867. French Opera Bouffe introduced to New York City, by F. L.
    Bateman, at the French Theatre, where Offenbach's "La Grande
    Duchesse" ran for 180 nights.

  1867. In this year the following Conservatories of Music were
    established:

        The Boston Conservatory, Julius Eichberg, director, Boston,
      Mass.
        The New England Conservatory, Eben Tourjee, director,
      Boston, Mass.
        The Cincinnati Conservatory, Clara Bauer, director,
      Cincinnati, O.
        The Chicago Academy of Music, Dr. F. Ziegfeld, director,
      Chicago, Ill. (Later known as the Chicago Musical College.)

  1868. Jan. 11. Liszt's symphonic poem "Die Ideale" given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1868. Jan. 25. C. C. Converse's "Festival Overture" produced by
    the Brooklyn Philharmonic Society.

  1868. April 13. Gade's cantata "The Crusaders" given by the Parker
    Club, in Boston, J. C. D. Parker, conductor.

  1868. April 18. Liszt's symphonic poem "Heroide Funebre" given in
    New York City.

  1868. May. 24. Reinecke's overture "King Manfred" given in New
    York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1868. Oct. 21. Handel's "Royal Fireworks" music given in New York
    City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1868. Nov. 11. Salem (Mass.) Oratorio Society founded. Carl
    Zerrahn was elected as conductor at a later meeting.

  1868. Nov. 28. Gade's overture "Hamlet" given by the Philharmonic
    Society, New York City.

  1868. Dec. 4. Haydn's Symphony in B flat given in Boston, by the
    Harvard Musical Association.

  1868. Dec. 10. Joachim's "Hungarian Concerto" for violin given by
    the Harvard Musical Association, in Boston, with B. Listemann as
    soloist.

  1868. Dec. 12. Schubert's Twenty-third Psalm, also Mozart's First,
    Second, and Third Motets given in New York City, by Theodore
    Thomas.

  1868. Bruch's First Violin Concerto (G minor) given at a concert
    of a New York Conservatory, with Richard Arnold as soloist.

  1868. Theodore Thomas established his Symphony Orchestra in New
    York City.

  1869. Jan. 9. Catel's overture to "Semiramide" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1869. Jan. 16. Rubinstein's musical portrait "Faust," and Gade's
    "Spring Fantasia" given in New York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1868. May 9. Mendelssohn's "Reformation" Symphony, and Schubert's
    Symphony in B minor, given at the Triennial Festival, Boston.

  1869. Feb. 11. Barnett's cantata "The Ancient Mariner" given under
    Mr. Sharland, at the Mt. Pleasant Congregational Church,
    Roxbury, Mass.

  1869. Feb. 18. Gade's Second Symphony (in E) given by the Harvard
    Musical Association, in Boston.

  1869. Mar. 13. Max Bruch's Symphony in E flat given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1869. April 3. Singer's Fantasia for Pianoforte and Orchestra;
    Volkmann's "Festival Overture," and Liszt's symphonic poem
    "Prometheus" given by Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1869. May 8. Schumann's "Manfred" music given by the Philharmonic
    Society, New York City, with Edwin Booth as reader.

  1869. May. 12, Schubert's "Italian Overture" given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1869. June 15. First concert of the Peace Jubilee in Boston.

  1869. July 20. Strauss's waltz "Wein, Weib, und Gesang" given in
    New York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1869. Dec. 2. Anna Mehlig, noted pianist, visited America and
    played at Miss Porter's School, Farmington, Conn. She appeared
    on Dec. 18, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.

  1869. Dec. 15. A season of six nights of Russian opera begun at
    the Theatre Francaise, New York City, under Leon Jasievitch,
    with Levitzkaya as leading soprano, and Dimitri d'Agreneff,
    tenor. The opera "Askold's Tomb" was given.

  1869. Dec. 30. Haydn's Fifth Symphony (in D) given by the Harvard
    Musical Association, in Boston.

  1869. First of twenty-two annual tours made this season by the
    Theodore Thomas Orchestra.

  1869-1874. Church Music Association, New York City. The first
    performance in America of Beethoven's Mass in D was given by
    this Association.

  1870. Jan. 8. Raff's Second Symphony (in C) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1870. Jan. 22. A Russian Male Choir of nine voices, under Dimitri
    Agreneff Slaviansky, visited America.

  1870. Feb. 17. Mozart's Second Pianoforte Concerto (D minor) given
    by the Harvard Musical Association in Boston.

  1870. Feb. 28. Mendelssohn's overture to "Ruy Blas" given in
    Boston.

  1855. Mar. 10. Selections from Wagner's "Die Meistersinger" played
    by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1870. May 9. Liszt's "Goethe March" given in New York City, by
    Theodore Thomas.

  1870. May 26. Dargomysky's "Cosatchague" given by Theodore Thomas,
    at the Central Park Garden, New York City. (Selections from
    opera.)

  1870. July 14. Glinka's "Jota Aragonese" given by Theodore Thomas,
    at Central Park Garden, New York City, and

  1870. Aug. 25. Glinka's "Kamarinskaja."

  1870. Sept. 19. American debut of Christine Nilsson, noted
    soprano, at a concert in Steinway Hall, New York City. Her
    operatic debut took place Oct. 25, 1871, at the Academy of
    Music, as _Lucia_, under Carl Rosa.

  1870. Nov. 12. Mozart's opera "Der Schauspieldirektor" given in
    New York City.

  1870. Marie Krebs, noted German pianist, visited America.

  1870. Feb. 5. Karl Goldmark's overture to "Sakuntala" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York.

  1871. Jan. 7. Rubinstein's "Ocean Symphony" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1871. Feb. 23. Gade's Third Symphony (A minor) given by the
    Harvard Musical Association, Boston.

  1871. May 3. Rossini's "Messe Solennelle" given in Boston, under
    the direction of George W. Whiting.

  1871. May. 7. Mozart's overture to "Idomeneo" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1871. June 13. Reinecke's "Festival Overture,"

  1871. June 22. Wagner's "Kaiser March," and

  1871. June 27. Joachim's First March (in C) given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1871. July 19. Rubinstein's overture to "Dimitri Donskoi,"

  1871. July 21. Joachim's Second March (in D) given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1871. Aug. 10. Rheinberger's "Wallenstein's Camp,"

  1871. Aug. 17. Schubert's March in B minor,

  1871. Sept. 8. Wagner's "Hildegung's March," given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1871. Sept. 18. American debut of the noted German tenor, Theodore
    Wachtel, at the Stadt Theatre, New York City, in "Le Postillon
    de Longjumeau."

  1871. Nov. 9. Schubert's overture to "Alfonso and Estrella" given
    by the Harvard Musical Association, in Boston.

  1871. Nov. 22. Ambroise Thomas's opera "Mignon" given at the
    Academy of Music, New York City, with Christine Nilsson in the
    title-role.

  1871. Nov. 23. Mozart's Symphony in C given by the Harvard Musical
    Association; also Handel's Concerto for oboe, with A. Kugler as
    soloist, in Boston.

  1871. Dec. 2. Rubinstein's Pianoforte Concerto in D minor given in
    Boston, by Theodore Thomas Orchestra, with Marie Krebs as
    soloist.

  1871. Dec. 6. Introduction and final scene from Wagner's opera
    "Tristan und Isolde"; also Raff's Symphony in F, given by
    Theodore Thomas in Boston.

  1871. Dec. 7. Haydn's Third Symphony (E flat) given by the Harvard
    Musical Association, in Boston.

  1871. The Illinois College Conservatory of Music, Jacksonville,
    Ill., established, with I. B. Posnawski as director.

  1871. The Apollo Club (male voices) established in Boston with B.
    J. Lang as conductor.

  1872. Jan. 6. Reinecke's Pianoforte Concerto in F sharp minor (Op.
    72) given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City, with S. B.
    Mills as soloist.

  1872. Jan. 20. Cherubini's opera "Les Deux Journees" (The Water
    Carriers) presented in Boston, by Madame Parepa-Rosa and her
    company. First New York performance was Feb. 10.

  1872. Jan. 20. Liszt's symphonic poem "Orpheus" given in New York
    City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1872. Feb. 1. Haydn's "Oxford Symphony" (in G) given by the
    Harvard Musical Association, in Boston.

  1872. Feb. 14. American debut of Charles Santley, noted English
    baritone, in "Zampa" at New York City.

  1872. Feb. 23. Gade's Third Concert Overture given in Boston, by
    the Harvard Musical Association.

  1872. Mar. 7. Taubert's "Arabian Nights" overture; and Mozart's
    Seventh Pianoforte Concerto (C minor) with Hugo Leonhard as
    soloist, given by the Harvard Musical Association, in Boston.

  1872. Mar. 22. Ambroise Thomas's opera "Hamlet" presented in New
    York City, with Christine Nilsson as _Ophelia_, Annie Louise
    Cary as _The Queen_, Brignoli as _Laertes_, A. Barre as
    _Hamlet_, Coletti as _The Ghost_, Reichardt as _Horatio_, and
    Locatelli as _Polonius_.

  1872. May 30. Rubinstein's humoresque "Don Quixote," given in New
    York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1872. Aug. 1. Raff's overture to "Dame Kobold," and

  1872. Sept. 17. Wagner's "Ride of the Valkyries" given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1872. Sept. 23. Anton Rubinstein, great Russian pianist, and Henri
    Wieniawski, noted violinist, made their American debut at
    Steinway Hall, New York City, and then toured the country.

  1872. Sept. 30. American debut of Pauline Lucca, noted soprano, as
    _Selika_ in "L'Africaine" at the Academy of Music, New York
    City, under Maretzek.

  1872. Nov. 22. Ambroise Thomas's opera "Mignon" presented at the
    Academy of Music, New York City, with Christine Nilsson and
    Capoul in the leading parts.

  1872. Dec. 3. Liszt's eleventh symphonic poem, "The Battle of the
    Huns" (Hunnenschlacht), given at a concert in Boston, by
    Theodore Thomas.

  1872. Dec. 14. Raff's Fourth Symphony (in G) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1872. Second Peace Jubilee held in Boston.

  1872. Orpheus Club (male chorus) formed in Philadelphia.

  1872. Emil Sauret, noted French violinist, made his first concert
    tour in America.

  1873. Jan. 9. Cherubini's overture to "Ali Baba" played in Boston.

  1873. Jan. 18. Liszt's "Hirtengesang" from "Christus" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1873. Jan. 21. First concert of the Apollo Club of Chicago, given
    at Standard Hall. The club was organized Sept. 1872, with George
    P. Upton, president, and Silas Pratt, conductor.

  1873. Feb. 15. Gade's Eighth Symphony (B minor) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1873. Mar. 13, Mozart's Pianoforte Concerto in A given by the
    Harvard Musical Association, in Boston.

  1873. May 22. J. O. Grimm's Second Suite in Canon Form, given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1873. May 29. Brahm's Serenade in D given by Theodore Thomas, in
    New York City.

  1873. June 3. Production of John K. Paine's oratorio "St. Peter"
    at Portland, Me., with Emma Thursby, Adelaide Phillips, George
    Osgood, and Rudolphson as soloists.

  1873. June 12. Svensden's First Symphony (in D) given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1873. Sept. 18. Svensden's symphonic overture "Sigurd Slembe"
    given by Theodore Thomas, in New York City, and Sept. 23, A.
    Hamerik's "Nordish Suite."

  1873. Oct. 1. American debut of Italo Campanini, great Italian
    tenor, as _Gennaro_ in "Lucrezia Borgia," in New York City, at
    the Academy of Music.

  1873. Oct. 3. American debut of Victor Maurel, great French
    baritone, as _Valentine_ in "Faust" at the Academy of Music, New
    York City.

  1873. Oct. 7. American debut of Ilma di Murska, noted Polish
    soprano, as _Amina_ in "La Sonnambula" at the Grand Opera House,
    New York City, under Strakosch.

  1873. Nov. 6. W. Sterndale Bennett's Pianoforte Concerto in E
    given by the Harvard Musical Association, in Boston, with E.
    Perabo as soloist.

  1873. Nov. 15. Max Bruch's introduction to "Loreley" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1873. Nov. 26. Verdi's opera "Aida" presented at the Academy of
    Music, New York City, by M. Strakosch with Torriani as _Aida_,
    Annie Louise Cary as _Amneris_, Campanini as _Rhadames_, Victor
    Maurel as _Amonasro_, Manetti as _Ramfis_, and Scolara as _The
    King_.

  1873. Dec. 3. Raff's "Lenore Symphony" (fifth--in E) given by
    Theodore Thomas, in Boston.

  1873. Germania Orchestra organized in Pittsburgh, Pa.

  1873. A Conservatory of Music established in connection with
    Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill.

  1873. Madame Julie Rive-King, noted American pianist, made her
    debut in Cincinnati, O.

  1874. Jan. 10. Volkmann's Serenade in D minor given by Theodore
    Thomas, in Brooklyn, N.Y.

  1874. Jan. 24. Rubinstein's character sketch "Ivan IV" given in
    New York City, by Theodore Thomas, and

  1874. Jan. 28. Meyerbeer's "Inauguration March."

  1874. Feb. 14. George F. Bristow's "Arcadian Symphony" given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City, also Gade's overture to
    "Michael Angelo."

  1874. May 8. Bach's Passion Music according to St. Matthew given,
    in part, by the Handel and Haydn Society in Boston. Selections
    had been given May 13, 1871, and the work was given complete, in
    two concerts in 1879.

  1874. May 14. Hofmann's "Hungarian Suite"; the overture to
    Gounod's "Le Medecin Maigre Lui"; and C.M. von Weber's overture
    to "Abu Hassan" given by Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1874. May 20. Gounod's overture to "Mireille" given in New York
    City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1874. May 21. Hiller's "Dramatic Fantasia," and Saint-Saen's
    "Marche Heroique" given by Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1874. July 16. Sullivan's overture to "The Tempest"; July 29,
    Massenet's "Scenes Pittoresques"; and July 30, Ferdinand David's
    "Festival March," given in New York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1874. Aug. 13. Reinecke's "In Memoriam"; and Aug. 21, Zellner's
    "Die Schoene Melusine" given by Theodore Thomas, in New York
    City.

  1874. Sept. 17. Rubinstein's "Ouverture Triomphale" given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1874. Oct. 28. Grieg's Pianoforte Concerto in A minor, given at a
    Theodore Thomas concert in Boston, with Boskowitz as soloist.

  1874. Nov. 14. Raff's Pianoforte Concerto, Opus 185, given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City, with Lina Luckhardt as
    soloist.

  1874. Nov. 27. Bach's Suite in B minor given by Theodore Thomas,
    in New York City.

  1874. Dec. 12. Bach's "Ciaconna" in D minor, arranged for
    orchestra by Raff, given by the Philharmonic Society, New York
    City.

  1874. Madame Emmy Fursch-Madi made her American debut in New
    Orleans, La., with the French Opera Company. She was heard in
    New York in 1882, and became professor of singing at the
    National Conservatory, New York City. Debut Nov. 7, 1883, as
    _Ortrud_ in "Lohengrin."

  1874. Clara Louise Kellogg made her American operatic debut under
    Maurice Grau, in New York City. (She had appeared as _Gilda_ in
    "Rigoletto" at the Academy of Music in 1861 (Feb. 27), before
    going to Europe, and had concertized in the United States for
    four years, 1868-1872.)

  1874. The Cecilia Society of Boston organized with B. J. Lang as
    conductor.




CHAPTER VI

1875-1890


The period of fifteen years from 1875 to 1890 was most certainly a
period of progress. Not only was the country growing rapidly in
population and wealth, but means of communication were much greater and
more efficient than in the preceding years. The present writer well
remembers a journey from San Francisco to St. Louis, and on to Boston in
1878, when there was one single track railroad between Oakland and
Omaha. Cheyenne consisted of two rows of primitive looking wooden
houses, behind which were "anchored" many emigrants' wagons, or "prairie
schooners" as they were called. Only a few years later (in the early
eighties) Colonel Mapleson visited Cheyenne with his opera company,
which included Patti and Gerster, and wrote thus of the place: "Although
Cheyenne is but a little town, consisting of about two streets, it
possesses a most refined society, composed, it is true, of cow-boys; yet
one might have imagined oneself at the London Opera when the curtain
rose,--the ladies in brilliant toilettes and covered with diamonds; the
gentlemen all in evening dress. The entire little town is lighted by
electricity. The club-house is one of the pleasantest I have ever
visited, and the people are most hospitable."

This account reminds the writer of a visit, not so many years ago, to
Oklahoma City where the ladies resembled those of Cheyenne. There was,
however, but one gentleman, within the writer's range of vision, in
evening dress. And when Mapleson visited Cheyenne Oklahoma was an Indian
reservation. Thus has civilization advanced.

In 1875 San Francisco was already a good-sized city, but almost the
whole country between San Francisco and Chicago and St. Louis has been
developed since 1875.

In San Francisco we find the establishment of the "Loring Club" in 1877.
But good music was getting its roots in deeper in the East. In New York
the "Symphony Society" was founded by Dr. Leopold Damrosch in 1878, and
was followed in 1881 by the "Boston Symphony Orchestra," which was
established through the liberality of Major Henry L. Higginson.

"The Music Teachers' National Association" was also formed in 1876, and
while it is not in the public eye in the way that opera and concerts
are, yet its influence throughout the land has been very marked, and has
led to state associations, with their annual conferences, and exchanges
of views among teachers.

In the concert world we find the names of several
celebrities,--Rubinstein had visited America in 1872, and Hans von Buelow
in 1875, Moritz Rosenthal in 1888, and Godowski in 1890. We find also
among the noted pianists who were first known here in this period
Arabella Goddard, Rafael Joseffy, Fanny Bloomfield-Zeisler and Josef
Hofmann.

Some noted violinists also visited America, August Wilhelmj in 1878,
Ovide Musin, Teresina Tua, and in 1888 Fritz Kreisler. But perhaps the
most noteworthy event was the appearance of Maud Powell, an American
woman, whose career placed her in the front rank of violinists, and has
but recently ended with her death.

Of singers there were a great many, but most of them appeared in opera.
Of the Americans who gained international reputation were Emma Abbott,
Alwina Valleria (of Baltimore), Lillian Nordica (Norton), Emma Nevada
(Wixom), and Charles R. Adams.

Among the European celebrities who visited America were Madame
Rudersdorff, Etelka Gerster, Scalchi, Marcella Senibrich, Amalia
Materna, and Lilli Lehmann, also Alberto Stagno, Max Alvary, Albert
Niemann, Francesco Tarnagno.

This leads us to a short review of opera, and as New York City was the
headquarters from which numerous companies issued to charm the rest of
the country, a review of New York is practically a review of opera for
the whole country.

From 1850 to 1875 opera is said to have "flourished on failure" chiefly
under Maretzek and Strakosch. Also, opera meant Italian opera, or at
least opera in Italian. There were spasmodic efforts to promote German
opera, chiefly by Adolf Neuendorff, who managed the German Theatre in
New York City from 1872 to 1883. In 1876 a Wagner Festival was given in
New York, and in 1878 there was a short and unsuccessful season given by
the Pappenheim Opera Company, during which "Rienzi" was sung for the
first time in America. Theodore Thomas did much to prepare the way by
playing excerpts from the Wagner operas at his concerts, but Dr. Leopold
Damrosch in 1884 set on foot a movement which, during the next few
years, brought to America several of the greatest German singers, and
gave to the public adequate representations of many of the Wagnerian
operas. Dr. Damrosch died in 1885 and his work was taken up by Anton
Seidl, who had been associated with Wagner in the production of the
"Ring" at Beyreuth. Under Seidl "Die Meistersinger" had its first
performance in America, in 1886; "Tristan und Isolde" and "Siegfried" in
1887; "Die Goetterdaemmerung," in 1888, and "Das Rheingold" in 1889. Thus
German opera was well launched in this period.

To return to Italian opera,--Colonel Mapleson invaded the United States
in 1878 bringing with him a good company of singers. He did not go
farther west than St. Louis. Several tours followed in succeeding years.
During his third tour he gave the first performance in America of
Boito's "Mefistofele," with Campanini, Valleria, Cary and Novara. About
this time he found a strong competitor in Henry E. Abbey, who secured
Nilsson as a counter-attraction to Patti who was under Mapleson. This
competition caused Mapleson to proceed farther west, so he led his
company as far as San Francisco, where he appears to have taken the town
by storm, and, if his account is correct, the march in "Aida" was
performed by six hundred of the State militia and he had the assistance
of a military band and an extra chorus of three hundred and fifty
voices. But Mapleson's enterprises were beset with difficulties and
finally ended in disaster, although not for some years. To many people,
who can remember the rivalry between Abbey and Mapleson in the eighties,
when Patti, Gerster, Sembrich, Scalchi, Nilsson, Annie Louise Cary,
Campanini, Ravelli and del Puente were in their prime, these were the
days of Italian opera in America. Probably much was lacking in the
staging and scenery, but the singers have been unsurpassed.

Before closing the review of this period we come to that which is of
immense importance in the development of music in America, viz. the
appearance of a number of composers who have taken high rank among the
composers of the world;--John K. Paine, whose first symphony was
produced in 1875, was followed shortly by Arthur Bird, George W.
Chadwick, Horatio Parker, Harry Rowe Shelley, Dudley Buck and Edward A.
MacDowell. Nothing speaks more eloquently of the progress of music in
America than the work of these men, and of several others of smaller
achievements.

  1875. Jan. 6. "Wotan's Departure" and "The Magic Fire Scene" from
    Wagner's opera "Die Walkuere" given by Theodore Thomas, in
    Philadelphia.

  1875. Jan. 8. Gluck's overture to "Paris and Helen" and Raff's
    Sixth Symphony (D minor) given by Theodore Thomas, in New York
    City.

  1875. Jan. 15. Seifert's "Festival March" given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1875. Jan. 16. Brahms's "Hungarian Dances" given (from MS.) by the
    Brooklyn Philharmonic Society.

  1875. Jan. 22. Haydn's Ninth Symphony (in C) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1875. Feb. 6. Hofmann's "Frithjof" symphony given in New York
    City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1875. Feb. 20. Spohr's Third Symphony (in C minor) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1875. Feb. 22. Dr. Leopold Damrosch's oratorio "Ruth and Naomi"
    sung by the Oratorio Society, New York City.

  1875. Mar. 4. Rubinstein's Fourth (Dramatic) Symphony given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1875. April 24. W. Sterndale Bennett's "Paradise and the Peri"
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1875. May 1. The music of Mendelssohn's comic opera "The Wedding
    of Camacho" given by Theodore Thomas, in Chicago.

  1875. May 27. Liszt's "Rhapsodie Hongroise" (number 1); Schubert's
    "Impromptu" in C minor; and Schumann's "Bilder aus Osten"; and
    on the 28th, Schubert's "Teufel's Lustschloss" given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1875. June 3. Saint-Saens's symphonic poem "Le Rouet d'Omphale,"

  1875. June 17. von Weber's "First Symphony" (in C),

  1875. June 22. Lizst's "Rhapsodie Hongroise" (number 6).

  1875. June 24. Raff's "Sinfonietta" for wind instruments, given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1875. Aug. 5. Mozart's Intermezzo for Strings,

  1875. Aug. 10. Schubert's Octet for Strings,

  1875. Aug. 20. Schubert's Tenth Symphony (in C) given in New York
    City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1875. Sept. 7. W. Sterndale Bennett's Symphony in G minor,

  1875. Sept. 14. The "Introduction" and "Siegmund's Love Song" from
    Wagner's opera "Die Walkuere" given by Theodore Thomas, in New
    York City.

  1875. Oct. 4. American debut of Arabella Goddard, noted English
    pianist, at Steinway Hall, New York City.

  1875. Oct. 18. American debut of Madame Eugenie Pappenheim,
    dramatic soprano, in "Les Huguenots" at the Academy of Music,
    New York City, with the Wachtel Grand Opera Company.

  1875. Oct. 18. American debut of Dr. Hans von Buelow, great
    pianist, in Boston.

  1875. Oct. 21. Emma Albani (Lajeunnesse) made her debut in opera,
    as _Amina_ in "La Sonnambula" at the Academy of Music, New York
    City. She afterwards went to Europe, and returned to America a
    mature singer in 1883.

  1875. Oct. 25. Chaikovsky's Pianoforte Concerto, in B flat minor,
    given in Boston Music Hall, with Hans von Buelow as soloist.

  1875. Nov. 17. Verdi's "Requiem Mass" given by the Italian Opera
    Company, at the Academy of Music, New York City.

  1875. Dec. 4, Schumann's "Concertstuecke," Opus 92, given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1875. Dec. 27. Schubert's Pianoforte Sonata for Four Hands (Opus
    140) orchestrated by Joseph Joachim, given by the Harvard
    Musical Association, in Boston.

  1875. Cecilia Club organized in Philadelphia.

  1876. Jan. 6. Schubert's "Marche Heroique" given by the Harvard
    Musical Association, in Boston.

  1876. Jan. 24. American operatic debut of Therese Tietjens, noted
    dramatic soprano, as _Norma_, at the Academy of Music, New York
    City, under Strakosch. She had appeared in concert Oct. 4, 1875,
    with Arabella Goddard.

  1876. Jan. 26. J. K. Paine's First Symphony produced by Theodore
    Thomas, in Boston.

  1876. Jan. 29. Saint-Saens's "Danse Macabre" given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1876. Feb. 3. Saint-Saens's Second Pianoforte Concerto (G minor)
    given by the Harvard Musical Association, in Boston, with B. J.
    Lang as soloist. Carl Zerrahn conducting.

  1876. Feb. 17. Saint-Saens's Violoncello Concerto in A minor given
    at a concert of the Harvard Musical Association, in Boston, with
    Wulf Fries as soloist.

  1876. Feb. 19. Cherubini's overture to "Faniska" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1876. Feb. 25. Teresa Carreno, great pianist, appeared as a singer
    in the part of _Anna_ in "Don Giovanni," under Strakosch, at the
    Academy of Music, New York City.

  1876. Feb. 28. Raff's "Suite in F" given by Theodore Thomas, in
    New York City.

  1876. Feb. 28. The first part of Liszt's oratorio "Christus" given
    by the Oratorio Society, New York City. (The whole work was
    performed by the same society Mar. 2, 1887.)

  1876. April 17. American debut of Anna del Belocca, contralto, in
    "Il Barbiere" at the Academy of Music, New York City, under
    Strakosch.

  1876. April 16. Handel's oratorio "Joshua" given by the Handel and
    Haydn Society, in Boston.

  1876. April 22. Chaikovsky's overture to "Romeo et Juliette" given
    by the Philharmonic Society, New York City, with Carl Bergmann
    as conductor.

  1876. May 11. Wagner's "Centennial March"; Dudley Buck's
    "Centennial Meditation of Columbia"; and J. K. Paine's
    "Centennial Hymn" produced at the Centennial Exposition, in
    Philadelphia, under Theodore Thomas.

  1876. Oct. 9. Saint-Saens's symphonic poem "Phaeton" given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1876. Nov. 8. Wagner's opera "Il Vascello Fantasma" given in
    Philadelphia in Italian by Madame Pappenheim.

  1876. Nov. 14. Madame Annette Essipoff, pianist, made her debut at
    Steinway Hall, New York City.

  1876. Nov. 25. Bach's Suite in C given by Theodore Thomas, in New
    York City.

  1876. Dec. 26. Music Teachers' National Association organized at
    Delaware, Ohio, by Eben Tourjee, Theodore Presser, G. W. Cole,
    W. H. Dana, and others.

  1876. Loring Club formed in San Francisco, Cal.

  1877. Jan. 13. K. Goldmark's symphony "Laendliche Hochzeit" and
    Haydn's "The Tempest" given by the Philharmonic Society, New
    York City.

  1877. Jan. 16. Gade's "Noveletten" played in New York City, by the
    Theodore Thomas Orchestra.

  1877. Feb. 23. American debut of Emma Abbott, noted American
    soprano, in "La Figlia del Reggimento" at the Academy of Music,
    New York City, under the management of de Vivo.

  1877. Mar. 1. Saint-Saens's "Third Pianoforte Concerto" (in E
    flat) given by the Harvard Musical Association in Boston, with
    B. J. Lang as soloist.

  1877. Mar. 15. Ballet music from Saint-Saens's opera "Samson et
    Dalila" played in St. Louis, by the Theodore Thomas Orchestra.

  1877. Mar. 15. Brahms's "German Requiem" performed by the New York
    Oratorio Society.

  1877. Mar. 25-31. A Wagner Festival held in Boston in which Madame
    Pappenheim and Madame Canissa, Albert Niemann, G. Unger and
    Gustav Siehr took leading parts.

  1877. April 2. Verdi's opera "Don Carlos" presented at the Academy
    of Music, New York City, by the Havana Opera Combination, under
    Maretzek. (Admission one dollar, Reserved seat 50c extra.)

  1877. May 17. Production of J. C. D. Parker's "Redemption Hymn" by
    the Handel and Haydn Society, Boston.

  1877. June 6. Sullivan's cantata "On Shore and Sea" given under
    Theodore Thomas, in Chicago.

  1877. July 5. Mehul's overture to "Horatio Cocles,"

  1877. July 12. Hofmann's "Pictures from the North,"

  1877. July 20. Massenet's "Variations" and Rameau's "Romanesca,"

  1877. July 24. Saint-Saens's "Suite" (Opus 48), given by Theodore
    Thomas, in Chicago.

  1877. Nov. 2. J. K. Paine's symphonic fantasia on Shakespeare's
    "Tempest" given at Steinway Hall, New York City, by the Theodore
    Thomas Orchestra.

  1877. Nov. 14. Saint-Saens's fourth symphonic poem, "La Jeunesse
    d'Hercule," played at a Theodore Thomas Concert, in Boston.

  1877. Nov. 20. Raff's Suite for Pianoforte and Orchestra (Opus
    200) given by Theodore Thomas in New York City.

  1877. Dec. 17. Brahms's First Symphony given in New York City, by
    Dr. Leopold Damrosch. (Given a week later by Theodore Thomas, in
    New York City, and Jan. 3, 1878, by the Harvard Musical
    Association, Boston.)

  1877. Dec. 23. Parts 1 and 2 of Bach's "Christmas Oratorio" given
    by the Handel and Haydn Society, Boston, with Emma Thursby,
    Annie Louise Cary, W. J. and F. W. Winch as soloists. C. Zerrahn
    conducting.

  1877. Music department established at Syracuse (N. Y.) University,
    with Wm. Schultze as director.

  1877. Theodore Thomas began Summer Night Concerts in New York
    City.

  1877. Tivoli Opera House in San Francisco, Cal., opened.

  1878. Feb. 11. Madame Hermine Rudersdorff, who had been heard at
    the Peace Jubilees in Boston in 1871 and 1872, made her American
    operatic debut as _Ortrud_ in "Lohengrin."

  1878. Feb. 14. Saint-Saens's Fourth Pianoforte Concerto (in C
    minor) given by the Harvard Musical Association in Boston, with
    J. A. Preston, as soloist.

  1878. Feb. 16. Goldmark's "Wedding March and Variations" given by
    Theodore Thomas, in Brooklyn, N. Y.

  1878. Feb. 28. Wagner's "Siegfried Idyll" given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1878. Mar. 5. Wagner's opera "Rienzi" presented at the Academy of
    Music, New York City, with Madame Pappenheim as _Adriane_, Miss
    Hueman as _Irene_, Charles R. Adams as _Rienzi_, and Blum as
    _Orsini_.

  1878. May 14. O. Singer's "Festival Ode" given at the Cincinnati
    (O.) May festival with Madame Eugenie Pappenheim, C. R. Adams,
    and M. W. Whitney as soloists. Theodore Thomas conducting.

  1878. Sept. 26. American debut of August Wilhelmj, noted
    violinist, at Steinway Hall, New York City.

  1878. Oct. 3. Brahms's Second Symphony (D major) given in New York
    City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1878. Oct. 23. Bizet's opera "Carmen" presented at the Academy of
    Music, New York City, with Minnie Hauck, Madame Sinico, Italo
    Campanini, and Del Puente.

  1878. Nov. 11. American debut of Etelka Gerster, brilliant
    soprano, at the Academy of Music, New York City, as _Amina_, in
    "La Sonnambula," supported by Campanini and Galassi.

  1878. Nov. 23. Ernst's violin concerto "Pathetique" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City, with Edouard Remenyi as
    soloist.

  1878. Dec. 19. Mozart Pianoforte Concerto in A major, given by the
    Harvard Musical Association, in Boston, with H. G. Tucker as
    soloist.

  1878. Symphony Society of New York City founded by Dr. Leopold
    Damrosch.

  1878. Cincinnati College of Music established, and Theodore Thomas
    appointed director.

  1878-9. Oct. 15 to April. Colonel Mapleson made his first operatic
    tour in America, with a company which included Etelka Gerster,
    Minnie Hauck, Trebelli, Alwina Valleria, Campanini, Frapolli,
    Galassi, del Puente and Foli, with Arditi as conductor.
    Presented opera in New York, Chicago, Boston, St. Louis,
    Cincinnati, Philadelphia, Baltimore and Washington.

  1879. Feb. 8. Chaikovsky's Third Symphony (in D) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1879. Feb. 23. Sullivan's oratorio "The Prodigal Son" given in
    Boston by the Handel and Haydn Society.

  1879. April 11. Bach's "Passion according to St. Matthew" given
    complete, in two concerts, by the Handel and Haydn Society, in
    Boston.

  1879. April 15. F. Kiel's oratorio "Christus" given by the
    Oratorio Society, New York City.

  1879. May 9. Hiller's oratorio "Saul" given by the New York
    Liederkranz Society at the Academy of Music, New York City.

  1879. May 10. Production of Bristow's "Great Republic Overture" by
    the Brooklyn Philharmonic Society, Theodore Thomas conducting.

  1879. Oct. 13. American debut of Rafael Joseffy, noted Hungarian
    pianist, at Chickering Hall, New York City.

  1879. Oct. 22. American debut of Alwina Valleria (A. V. Lohrmann
    of Baltimore) as _Marguerite_ in "Faust" at the Academy of
    Music, New York City.

  1879. Dec. 3. Goldmark's "Penthesilea Overture" given in
    Cincinnati, by Theodore Thomas.

  1879. Dec. 3. American debut of Marie Marimon, as _Amina_ in "La
    Sonnambula," supported by Campanini and del Puente, at the
    Academy of Music, New York City.

  1879. Dec. 5. Dvo[vr]ak's "Slavonic Dances" No. 7 and No. 8, also
    the first movement of Guilmant's "First Symphony" for organ and
    orchestra given at a Philharmonic Concert, in Boston, with
    Charles H. Morse as soloist.

  1879. Dec. 8. Dedication of the Central Music Hall, Chicago.
    Carlotta Patti sang.

  1879. Dec. 11. Production of George W. Chadwick's overture to "Rip
    van Winkle" by the Harvard Musical Association, in Boston.

  1879-1883. Philharmonic Society, Boston.

  1880. Jan. 8. Herman Goetz's Symphony in F major given by the
    Harvard Musical Association, in Cambridge, Mass.

  1880. Jan. 17. Chaikovsky's "Suite for Giant Orchestra" given by
    the Symphony Society, New York City.

  1880. Jan. 19. American debut of Castelmary (Count A. de Castan),
    noted French baritone, as _Ramfis_ in "Aida" at Booth's Theatre,
    New York City.

  1880. Jan. 27. Mendelssohn's "Lauda Zion" given by the New York
    Vocal Union, at Chickering Hall, New York City.

  1880. Feb. 4. Dvo[vr]ak's third "Slavische Rhapsodie" given in
    Cincinnati, by Theodore Thomas.

  1880. Feb. 12. Berlioz's opera "La Damnation de Faust" given in
    concert form, by the Oratorio Society of New York City. Dr.
    Leopold Damrosch, conductor. (Stage performance in 1908.)

  1880. Feb. 22. H. Hofmann's cantata "Cinderella" given by the
    German Liederkranz, New York City.

  1880. Feb. 28. The music of Meyerbeer's "Struensee" given at
    concert at Chickering Hall, New York City, under Mr. Carlberg.

  1880. Mar. 10. Production of J. K. Paine's "Spring Symphony," by
    the Harvard Musical Association, in Cambridge, Mass.

  1880. Mar. 11. Dvo[vr]ak's second "Slavische Rhapsodie" given by
    the Symphony Society of New York City, Dr. Leopold Damrosch,
    conductor.

  1880. May 29. Production of Dudley Buck's prize symphonic cantata,
    "The Golden Legend," at the Cincinnati Festival.

  1880. May 7. Saint-Saens's oratorio "Le Deluge" given by the
    Handel and Haydn Society in Boston.

  1880. May. 10. Production of E. C. Phelps' symphony "Hiawatha" by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1880. Oct. 4. American debut of Georg Henschel at a concert of the
    Symphony Society, in New York City.

  1880. Oct. 18. American debut of Luigi Ravelli, Italian tenor, as
    _Edgardo_ in "Lucia" at the Academy of Music, New York City,
    under Mapleson.

  1880. Nov. 19. First part of Liszt's symphony after "la Divina
    Commedia" given at a Philharmonic Society's Concert, in Boston,
    Bernhard Listemann conducting.

  1880. Nov. 24. Boito's opera "Mefistofele" presented at the
    Academy of Music, New York City, with Annie Louise Cary,
    Campanini and Novara, under Mapleson.

  1880. Music of the third act of "Die Goetterdaemmerung" given in New
    York and Brooklyn, by the Philharmonic Societies of those
    cities united under Theodore Thomas, with Campanini, Remmertz,
    and Steinbuch as soloists.

  1880. Mapleson made his third American operatic tour with a
    company which included Gerster, Valleria, Cary, Ravelli, and
    Campanini.

  1881. Jan. 2. Haydn's "Surprise Symphony" given by the Brooklyn
    Philharmonic Society, Theodore Thomas conducting.

  1881. Jan. 6. Hans von Bronsart's "Spring Fantasie" given by the
    Symphony Society, of New York City.

  1881. Feb. 17. F. L. Ritter's "Second Symphony" given by the
    Harvard Musical Association, in Boston.

  1881. Feb. 25. Handel's "L'Allegro, Il Penseroso, et Il Moderato"
    given by the Oratorio Society, in New York City.

  1881. Mar. 11. Rheinberger's oratorio "Demetrius" given in New
    York City, under Theodore Thomas.

  1881. Mar. 11. Svendsen's fantasia "Romeo et Juliette" given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1881. Mar. 22. Andante and finale from Mozart's "Serenade" (No.
    12) given at a Philharmonic Concert in Boston, also
    Saint-Saens's "Suite Algerienne."

  1881. Mar. 28. Schumann's "Scenes from Faust" given by the Cecilia
    Society, in Boston.

  1881. April 1. The Nocturno from Mozart's Serenade (Op. 8), given
    at a concert under Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1881. April 2. The ballet music from Rubinstein's opera "The
    Demon" given at a concert of the Philharmonic Orchestra, in
    Boston, also Bizet's suite "Arlesienne."

  1881. May. Rubinstein's sacred opera "The Tower of Babel" given in
    New York City, by Dr. Damrosch. Also Berlioz's "Requiem."

  1881. July 16. The ballet music from Rubinstein's opera "Nero"
    given in New York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1881. Oct. 14. Brahms's "Academic Overture" given in Boston, by
    the Theodore Thomas Orchestra.

  1881. Oct. 22. Boston Symphony Orchestra, organized by Major
    Henry L. Higginson, gave its first concert, with Georg Henschel
    as conductor.

  1881. Oct. 29. Brahms's "Tragic Overture" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1881. Nov. 26. First complete performance in America of Joachim's
    "Concerto for Violin" (Op. 11) given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra, with Bernhard Listemann as soloist.

  1881. Dec. 1. Grieg's "Norwegian Melodies" for Orchestra given by
    the Symphony Society in New York City. Also Saint-Saens's
    "Pianoforte Concerto," with Madame Madeline Schiller as soloist.

  1881. Dec. 10. Rubinstein's Fifth Symphony given in New York City,
    by Theodore Thomas.

  1881. New York Chorus Society organized with six hundred voices
    under the direction of Theodore Thomas.

  1882. Jan. 29. Raff's "Die Tageszeiten" for chorus, pianoforte and
    orchestra, given by the German Liederkranz in New York City.

  1882. Feb. 11. Brahms's Rhapsody for contralto, male chorus and
    orchestra (Opus 53) given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1882. Feb. 11. Huber's "Tell Symphony" given in New York City, by
    Theodore Thomas.

  1882. Feb. 18. The overture to Massenet's "Phedre" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra. Also Bizet's overture "La Patrie." G.
    Henschel conducting.

  1882. Mar. 9. R. Fuch's "Serenade in D" given by the Harvard
    Musical Association, in Boston.

  1882. April 6. Berlioz's "Requiem" given by the New York Oratorio
    Society.

  1882. April 15. Goetz's Violin Concerto given by Theodore Thomas
    in New York City.

  1882. April 20. Dr. Leopold Damrosch's "Sulamith" given by the
    Oratorio Society of New York City.

  1882. May 6. Second act of H. Berlioz' "Les Troyens" (The Fall of
    Troy) given at a musical festival in the armory of the Seventh
    Regiment in New York City, under Theodore Thomas, with Madame
    Materna, E. Aline Osgood, E. Winant, Campanini, Galassi,
    Remmertz and M. W. Whitney as soloists.

  1882. July 12. Hofmann's "Overture to a Drama," and on the 18th
    Liszt's Second "Mephisto" Waltz given by Theodore Thomas, in
    Chicago, Ill.

  1882. Oct. 16. Offenbach's opera "Les Contes d'Hoffman" performed
    under the management of Maurice Grau, at the Fifth Avenue
    Theatre, New York City.

  1882. Nov. 3. The "Vorspiel" to Wagner's opera "Parsifal" given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City. Also F. Cowen's "Scandinavian
    Symphony."

  1882. Nov. 29. Guilmant's First Symphony for organ and orchestra,
    given at a Philharmonic Concert in Music Hall, Boston, with F.
    Archer as soloist. (The first movement had been given by C. H.
    Morse, Dec. 5, 1879.)

  1882. Dec. 6. Gounod's oratorio "The Redemption" given (from
    manuscript) by the New York Chorus Society, under Theodore
    Thomas.

  1882. Dec. 6. Saint-Saens's ode "La Lyre et La Harpe" sung by the
    Arion Society, Providence, R. I., under Jules Jordan.

  1882. Dec. 9. Gernsheim's Symphony in E flat, given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1882. Dec. 13. Brahms's Pianoforte Concerto in B flat given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City, with R. Joseffy, soloist.

  1882. Dec. 15. Max Bruch's Third Symphony (dedicated to the
    Symphony Society) given by that Society in New York City,
    conducted by the composer. At the same concert Rubinstein's
    Morceau Symphonique, "La Russie" was performed.

  1882. Dec. 20. American debut of Sophia Scalchi, noted contralto,
    as _Arsace_ in "Semiramide," with Adelina Patti as _The Queen_,
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1883. Jan. 6. Dvo[vr]ak's First Symphony (in D) given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City, and on the 10th Reinhold's Concert
    Overture.

  1883. Jan. 1. Professional debut of Madame Fannie Bloomfield
    Zeisler at Central Music Hall, Chicago, when she played
    Henselt's F minor concerto, with orchestra. Her debut as a child
    took place in Chicago, Feb. 25, 1875.

  1883. Jan. 13. G. W. Chadwick's "Thalia," an overture to an
    imaginary comedy, produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra,
    conducted by the composer.

  1883. Jan. 20. Massenet's "Scenes Alsaciennes"; and on the 27th F.
    Cowen's First Symphony (C minor) given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1883. Jan. 31 Rheinberger's Symphony in F given by the
    Philharmonic Society, Boston, Carl Zerrahn conducting.

  1883. Feb. 1. Scharwenka's Pianoforte Concerto given by Theodore
    Thomas in New York City, with X. Scharwenka as soloist.

  1883. Feb. 3. Grieg's "Two Melodies" for strings (Opus 34) given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1883. Feb. 16. The music of the "Good Friday Spell" from Wagner's
    opera "Parsifal" given by the Symphony Society, New York City.

  1883. Feb. 17. Henschel's "Serenade for Strings" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra; and on the 24th Chaikovsky's "Marche
    Slave."

  1883. Mar. 3. Mackenzie's Scotch rhapsody "Bobbie Burns" given by
    Theodore Thomas in Brooklyn, N. Y.

  1883. Mar. 10. J. K. Paine's symphonic poem "The Tempest" produced
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1883. Mar. 12. American operatic debut of Madame Emma Albani
    (Marie Louise Cecilia Emma Lajeunnesse), noted soprano, on her
    return from Europe, as _Marguerite_ in Gounod's "Faust" at the
    Academy of Music, New York City, with Scalchi, Ravelli and
    Galassi in support.

  1883. April 2. Part VI of Bach's "Christmas Oratorio" given by the
    Cecilia Society in Boston.

  1883. April 4. Svendsen's Legende "Zorahayda" given in Boston.

  1883. May 1. Rubinstein's sacred opera "The Tower of Babel" given
    in concert form by the Handel and Haydn Society in Boston.

  1883. May 2. J. K. Paine's oratorio "The Nativity" produced by
    the Handel and Haydn Society in Boston. Also Cherubini's Mass in
    D minor; and on the 4th, Max Bruch's oratorio "Arminius."

  1883. July 18. Rubinstein's "Bal Costume" (first series) given in
    Chicago, by Theodore Thomas.

  1883. Oct. 23. Opening of the Metropolitan Opera House, New York
    City.

  1883. Oct. 24. American debut of Marcella Sembrich, great lyric
    soprano, in "Lucia di Lammermoor" at the Metropolitan Opera
    House, New York City.

  1883. Oct. 26. American debut of Alberto Stagno, noted Italian
    tenor, as _Manrico_ in "Il Trovatore" at the Metropolitan Opera
    House, New York City, under Henry E. Abbey.

  1883. Oct. 27. Delibes's "Cortege de Bacchus" from the ballet
    "Sylvia" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, and on

  1883. Nov. 3. Liszt's "Hungarian Rhapsodie" in D.

  1883. Nov. 16. American debut of Ovide Musin, noted Belgian
    violinist, with the New York Symphony Orchestra, under Dr.
    Leopold Damrosch.

  1883. Nov. 17. B. Godard's "Concerto Romantique" for violin given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, with C. M. Loeffler as
    soloist; and on Dec. 1, the first performance (from MS.) of K.
    Mueller-Berghaus's "Romance" for violoncello.

  1883. Nov. 21. Cowen's cantata "St. Ursula" given by the Oratorio
    Society, New York City.

  1883. Nov. 26. Operatic debut of Lillian Norton (Nordica) as
    _Marguerite_ in "Faust" at the Academy of Music, New York City,
    under Mapleson. She returned with the Italian Company in 1889-90
    but appeared with the Metropolitan Opera Company, Oct. 26, 1893.

  1883. Dec. 7. Chaikovsky's Second Symphony (in C) given by the New
    York Symphony Society.

  1883. Dec. 8. American debut of Madame Helen Hopekirk, noted
    Scotch pianist, with the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1883. Dec. 20. Ponchielli's opera "La Gioconda" presented at the
    Academy of Music, New York City, with Nilsson, Scalchi,
    Fursch-Madi, del Puente, and Novara.

  1883. Dec. 22. Volkmann's Second Symphony (in B flat), and
    Saint-Saens' ballet music to "Henry VIII" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1883-4. Grand opera given in the United States by Henry E. Abbey
    with a company which included Christine Nilsson, Alwina
    Valleria, Madame Fursch-Madi, Sophia Scalchi, Trebelli-Bettini,
    Campanini, Stagno, Novara, Capoul, Del Puente, Corsini,
    Kaschmann, and Marcella Sembrich.

  1884. Jan. 5. Svendsen's Second Symphony (in B flat) given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1884. Jan. 12. Mozart's Concerto for flute and harp (in C) given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1884. Jan. 14. American debut of Marianna Brandt, noted Austrian
    contralto, in "Fidelio" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New
    York City.

  1884. Jan. 19. Villiers Stanford's Serenade in G given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1884. Jan. 26. Spontini's overture to his opera "Olympia" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1884. Feb. 9. Bizet's third suite "Roma" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1884. Feb. 23. J. O. Grimm's Symphony in D minor given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra. Also Liszt's Pianoforte Concerto in A
    major, with Carl Baermann as soloist.

  1884. Mar. 7. Selections from Berlioz's sacred trilogy "The
    Childhood of Christ" given by the Symphony Society of New York
    City.

  1884. Production of G. W. Chadwick's Scherzo in F, also the
    entr'acte and finale of Massenet's "Les Erinnyes" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1884. April. 4. Beethoven's "Grand Quatuor" (Opus 131) (scored for
    full orchestra by Carl Mueller-Berghaus) given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1884. May 1. Hamerik's "Christian Trilogy" given by Theodore
    Thomas, in Baltimore, Md.

  1884. Oct. 24. Brahms's Third Symphony (in F) given at a Novelty
    Concert, under F. van der Stucken in New York City. Also
    Dvo[vr]ak's "Husitska" overture.

  1884. Nov. 8. Dvo[vr]ak's "Scherzo Capriccioso," given by Theodore
    Thomas, in Brooklyn, N. Y.

  1884. Nov. 21. American debut of Madame Schroeder-Hanfstaengl in
    "Les Huguenots" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1884. Nov. 22. The Pastoral from Bach's "Christmas oratorio," and
    Schumann's "Pictures from the Orient," given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1884. Nov. 24. American debut of Emma Nevada, noted soprano, as
    _Amina_ in "La Sonnambula," at the Academy of Music, in New York
    City.

  1884. Nov. 27. American debut of Frau Seidl-Krauss, as
    _Elizabeth_, and Anton Schott as _Tannhaeuser_, in "Tannhaeuser"
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1884. Dec. 6. Sgambati's Symphony in D major; Gustav Hollaender's
    "Romance" for violin and orchestra; and E. Chabrier's rhapsodie
    "Espana" given at a Novelty Concert, by Frank van der Stucken,
    in New York City.

  1884. Dec. 13. R. Strauss's Symphony in F minor given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1884. Dec. 18. Gounod's opera "Mireille" presented at the Academy
    of Music, New York City, with Emma Nevada as prima donna. (New
    Orleans, La., Dec. 29.)

  1884. Dec. 20. Lalo's "Rhapsodie Norvegienne" (in A), and the
    music of Rubinstein's ballet "La Vigne" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1884. A series of Wagner festival concerts given in New York City,
    under Theodore Thomas.

  1884. The Chicago Conservatory of Music established, in Chicago,
    Ill.

  1885. Jan. 5. American operatic debut of Frau Amalie Materna,
    noted German soprano, as _Elizabeth_ in "Tannhaeuser" at the
    Metropolitan Opera House. She had appeared in May 1882, in
    oratorio at the Cincinnati (O.) Festival.

  1885. Jan. 10. Nicode's Symphonic Variations given in New York
    City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1885. Jan. 23. Chaikovsky's "Serenade" for string orchestra, given
    by the Symphony Society of New York City.

  1885. Jan. 31. Bach's "Three Sonata Movements" (arranged for
    orchestra by W. Gericke) given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1885. Feb. 5. Berlioz's "Tristia" given in New York City, by
    Theodore Thomas; also Rameau's gavotte, tambourine, and minuet,
    from the opera "Castor and Pollux."

  1885. Mar. 14. Volkmann's overture to "Richard III" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1885. Mar. 16. J. Strauss' opera "Die Fledermaus" presented at the
    Casino, New York City, with De Wolf Hopper in the cast.

  1885. Mar. 31. Production of Dudley Buck's symphonic overture
    "Marmion" at a concert of American music, given in New York
    City, by Frank van der Stucken. Also Templeton Strong's
    symphonic poem "Undine," and E. C. Phelps's "American Legend"
    for violin and orchestra.

  1885. April 11. Cowen's "Welsh Symphony" (Fourth, in B minor)
    given by Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1885. April 16. Mackenzie's oratorio "The Rose of Sharon" given in
    New York City, under Theodore Thomas.

  1885. April 28. Rubinstein's "Fantasia Eroica" given in Brooklyn,
    N. Y., by Theodore Thomas.

  1885. Oct. 30. Gounod's oratorio "Mors et Vita" given in St.
    Louis, Mo., by Theodore Thomas.

  1885. Oct. 30. Ecker's Concert Overture, Schubert's "Trauermarsch"
    and R. Fuchs's Symphony in C major, given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1885. Nov. 4. American debut of Felia Litvinne, as _Leonora_ in
    "Il Trovatore" at the Academy of Music, New York City, under
    Colonel Mapleson.

  1885. Nov. 14. Mozart's "Haffner Serenade" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1885. Nov. 23. Anton Seidl appeared as conductor at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1885. Nov. 24. Chaikovsky's Third Suite given by Theodore Thomas,
    in New York City.

  1885. Nov. 25. American debut of Lilli Lehmann, noted German
    soprano, as _Carmen_, also of Max Alvary as _Don Jose_, in
    Bizet's opera "Carmen" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York
    City.

  1885. Dec. 2. Goldmark's opera "Die Koenigen von Saba" presented at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Lehmann and
    Fischer.

  1885. Dec. 3. Maude Powell, noted American violinist, made her
    debut on her return from European study and concertizing, under
    Theodore Thomas, at Orange, N. J. On Dec. 5 she appeared at
    Philadelphia. Played Max Bruch's First Violin Concerto.

  1885. Dec. 12. Scharwenka's Symphony in C minor, given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1885. Dec. 23. Massenet's opera "Manon" presented at the Academy
    of Music, New York City, by Mapleson, with Minnie Hauck, Del
    Puente, and Giannini in leading parts.

  1885. Walter Damrosch appointed conductor of the New York Symphony
    and Oratorio Societies, on the death of his father, Dr. Leopold
    Damrosch.

  1885. The American Institute of Applied Music established in New
    York City, by Miss Kate Chittenden.

  1885-1916. The Kneisel Quartet organized in Boston. Became well
    known throughout the United States and Europe.

  1886. Jan. 2. Saint-Saens's "Rhapsodie d'Auvergne" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1886. Jan. 4. Herman Goetz's opera "The Taming of the Shrew" given
    in New York City (in English) by the American Opera Company,
    Theodore Thomas conductor, at the Academy of Music. At this
    performance Pauline Allemand made her debut.

  1886. Jan. 4. Wagner's opera "Die Meistersinger" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Frau Seidl-Krauss
    as _Eva_, Marianne Brandt as _Magdalena_, Emil Fischer as _Hans
    Sachs_, Stritt as _Walther_, Staudigl as _Pogner_, Kemlitz as
    _Beckmesser_, Kraemer as _David_, and Anton Seidl as conductor.

  1886. Jan. 9. Dvo[vr]ak's Second Symphony (D minor) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1886. Jan. 9. E. Barnard's Violin Concerto in G major, given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra with T. Adamowski as soloist.

  1886. Jan. 12. Svendsen's "Norwegian Artists' Carnival" given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1886. Jan. 15. Lalo's "Rhapsodie and Scherzo" played by the
    Symphony Society, New York City.

  1886. Jan. 16. W. Gericke's "Chorus of Homage" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra, conducted by the composer.

  1886. Jan. 20. American debut of William Candidus, tenor, in a
    performance of "Lohengrin" (in English) at the Academy of Music,
    New York City, with the American Opera Company.

  1886. Jan. 21. Jensen's "Wedding Music" given by Theodore Thomas
    at a concert in Jersey City, N. J.

  1886. Jan. 23. H. Reinhold's "Prelude, Menuet, and Fugue" for
    strings given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1886. Jan. 30. Horatio Parker's "Scherzo" for orchestra played at
    a concert given in New York City, by Alexander Lambert, with F.
    van der Stucken as conductor.

  1886. Feb. 15. Johann Strauss's opera "The Gipsy Baron" (Die
    Zigeunerbaron) presented in English, by H. Conried, at the
    Casino, New York City.

  1886. Mar. 1. Delibes's opera "Lakme" presented by the American
    Opera Company, at the Academy of Music, New York City (in
    English) with Pauline Allemand in the title-role. (It had been
    given inadequately by Emma Abbott in 1883.)

  1886. Mar. 13. Scholz's Symphony in B flat given in New York City,
    by Theodore Thomas.

  1886. Mar. 13. Three movements from Gericke's "Serenade" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra, conducted by the composer.

  1886. Mar. 16. Liszt's "Concerto Pathetique" given in New York
    City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1886. Mar. 20. Dvo[vr]ak's cantata "The Spectre Bride" given in
    Brooklyn, N.Y., under Theodore Thomas; also Raff's "Die
    Jahreszeiten" for chorus, pianoforte and orchestra.

  1886. Mar. 23. Borodin's symphonic poem "On the Steppes of Central
    Asia," and the tarantella from Gernsheim's Symphony in F, given
    by the Philharmonic Society in Brooklyn, N. Y.

  1886. Mar. 23. Pratt's "Court Minuet" produced, and Delibes's
    ballet music "Sylvia," given by Theodore Thomas, in New York
    City.

  1886. April 30. Delibes's "Scene de Bal" given in New York City,
    by Theodore Thomas.

  1886. July 5. Rubinstein's "Bal Costume" (Second Series) given in
    New York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1886. July 21. Schytte's "Pantomimes" given in Chicago, by
    Theodore Thomas.

  1886. July 29. Bruckner's Seventh Symphony (E major) played by the
    Theodore Thomas Orchestra, in Chicago.

  1886. Oct. 26. Massenet's "Marche Heroique," and Gadsby's
    orchestral scene "The Forest of Arden," given in New York City,
    by Theodore Thomas.

  1886. Oct. 28. Nicode's "Jubilee March," Cesar Cui's "Tarantella,"
    and Massenet's "La Vierge" for string orchestras, given in New
    York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1886. Nov. 1. Chaikovsky's "Italian Caprice" for orchestra, played
    by the Philharmonic Society in New York City.

  1866. Nov. 4. Schumann's "Marche Funebre" and Arthur Sullivan's
    overture "In Memoriam" given in New York, by Theodore Thomas.
    Also Raff's "Festival March."

  1886. Nov. 5. Arthur Bird's First Symphony played by the Symphony
    Society in New York City.

  1886. Nov. 6. Brahms's Serenade in A for strings, and Dvo[vr]ak's
    "Legends" (Opus 59, first collection), given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1886. Nov. 10. American debut of Albert Niemann, noted Wagnerian
    tenor, in "Die Walkuere" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New
    York City.

  1886. Nov. 13. R. Henberger's overture to Byron's "Cain" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1886. Nov. 19. Bruell's opera "Das Goldene Kreuz" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1886. Dec. 1. Wagner's opera "Tristan und Isolde" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Lilli Lehmann as
    _Isolde_, M. Brandt as _Brangaene_, Niemann as _Tristan_,
    Robinson as _Kurwenal_, von Milde as _Melot_, Emil Fischer as
    _King Mark_. Anton Seidl, conductor.

  1886. Dec. 4. Chaikovsky's "Manfred Symphony" played by the
    Philharmonic Society, in New York City, Theodore Thomas
    conducting.

  1886. Dec. 11. Production of Chadwick's Second Symphony (B flat)
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1886. Dec. 11. Brahms's Fourth Symphony (E minor, Op. 98) given by
    the Symphony Society, New York City.

  1886. Dec. 23. Dvo[vr]ak's "Slavonic Rhapsodie" (Op. 45) given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1886. Dec. 30. Masse's opera "Galatea" presented at the Brooklyn
    Academy of Music, by Arthur Mees.

  1886. The American Opera Company established in New York City, by
    Mrs. Jeannette Thurber, with Theodore Thomas as conductor.
    Lasted two seasons.

  1886. Norfolk Festivals of the Litchfield County (Conn.) Choral
    Union commenced.

  1886. American Conservatory of Music established in Chicago, by J.
    J. Hattstaedt.

  1886. Chicago Symphony Orchestra organized with Hans Balatka as
    director.

  1887. Jan. 3. Goldmark's opera "Merlin" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, under Walter Damrosch.

  1887. Jan. 15. A. Krug's symphonic prologue to "Otello" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1887. Jan. 15. The music of Delibes's ballet "Coppelia" given in
    New York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1887. Feb. 19. Saint-Saens's Third Symphony (C minor) given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1887. Jan. 27. Mendelssohn's cantata "Athalie" (Racine's text)
    given by the Cecilia Society in Boston.

  1887. Feb. 5. Production of Arthur Foote's overture "In the
    Mountains" by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1887. Feb. 10. Hans von Buelow's symphonic poem, "The Minstrel's
    Curse," given by the Symphony Society, in New York City.

  1883. Nov. 10. A. C. Mackenzie's ballad "La belle dame sans merci"
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York.

  1887. Feb. 24. The Music of the "Flower Girl" Scene from Wagner's
    opera "Parsifal" given in Philadelphia, by Theodore Thomas.

  1887. Feb. 26. Berlioz's "The Trojans in Carthage" arranged as a
    dramatic cantata by H. E. Krehbiel, performed in English in
    Chickering Hall, New York City. Chief singers were M. Gramm, M.
    Groebl, F. Hirsch, M. Alvary, W. Dennison, G. Prehn and F.
    Remmertz; Narrator, Charles Roberts. F. van der Stucken,
    conductor.

  1887. Mar. 1. Dvo[vr]ak's "Legende" given by Theodore Thomas in
    New York City. Also Svendsen's "Festival Polonaise."

  1887. Mar. 3. Liszt's oratorio "Christus" given (complete) by the
    Oratorio Society of New York City.

  1887. Mar. 12. Rubinstein's oratorio "Paradise Lost" given in
    Brooklyn, under the direction of Theodore Thomas.

  1887. Mar. 14. Rubinstein's opera "Nero" given by the American
    Opera Company, in New York City.

  1887. Mar. 23. Moszkowski's First Suite for orchestra; and on the
    31st Dvo[vr]ak's Suite (Opus 39), given in New York City, by
    Theodore Thomas.

  1887. April 23. Arthur Bird's "Carnival Scene" given at a Symphony
    Concert in New York City, under the direction of F. van der
    Stucken, at Chickering Hall. Also Rubinstein's Sixth Symphony (A
    minor).

  1887. May 8. Sir Arthur Sullivan's oratorio, "The Golden Legend,"
    given by the Boston Oratorio Society, conducted by Frederick
    archer, at Music Hall, Boston.

  1887. July 21. Huber's "Roemische Karneval," and on the 28th
    Scharwenka's fantasia "Liebesnacht," given by Theodore Thomas in
    Chicago, Ill.

  1887. July. Production of Harry Rowe Shelley's "Dance of Egyptian
    Maidens"; and H. H. Huss's rhapsody for the pianoforte and
    orchestra at the convention of the Music Teachers' National
    Association in New York City.

  1887. Oct. 22. Dvo[vr]ak's Suite in D given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1887. Oct. 12. Reinecke's Variations on "Ein' Feste Burg" given by
    Theodore Thomas in New York City. Also Dvo[vr]ak's "Slavonic
    Dances" (Second Series).

  1887. Oct. 12. Lalo's "Symphony Espagnole" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1887. Oct. 12. Smetana's overture to "The Bartered Bride" given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1887. Nov. 15. L. A. Russell's "Pastoral" given at a concert of
    American Music in New York City, conducted by the composer. Also
    Arthur Whiting's Pianoforte Concerto in D minor.

  1887. Nov. 23. Nessler's opera "Der Trompeter von Saeckingen"
    presented at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1887. Nov. 24. Templeton Strong's Symphony in F major performed at
    a concert of American Music in New York City, under F. van der
    Stucken.

  1887 Nov. 25. Eugen d'Albert's First Symphony played by the
    Symphony Society of New York.

  1887. Nov. 29. American debut of Josef Hofmann (pianist) at a
    concert given in the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1887. Dec. 23. Noteworthy revival of Weber's opera "Euryanthe" at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Lilli Lehmann,
    Marianne Brandt, Max Alvary and Emil Fischer.

  1887. Dec. 24. Production of G. W. Chadwick's "Melpomene Overture"
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1887. Teresina Tua, noted violinist, visited America.

  1888. Jan. 4. Wagner's Nibelungen Trilogy given in America for the
    first time beginning on this date with a performance of "Das
    Rheingold," at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with
    Emil Fischer as _Wotan_, Max Alvary as _Loge_, Grienaur as
    _Donner_, Mittelhauer as _Froh_, Beck as _Alberich_, Sedlmayer
    as _Mime_, Weiss as _Fafner_, Modlinger as _Fasolt_, Madame
    Moran-Olden as _Fricka_, Bettaque as _Freia_, and Traubmann,
    Koschoska, and Reil as the _Rhine-Daughters_. Anton Seidl
    conductor.

  1888. Jan. 30. "Die Walkuere." (See 1877, April 12.)

  1888. Feb. 1. "Siegfried," with Lilli Lehmann, Marianne Brandt,
    Max Alvary, and Emil Fischer.

  1888. Jan. 6. Spontini's opera "Ferdinand Cortez" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1888. Jan. 17. Schubert's "Divertissement a la Hongroise" given by
    Theodore Thomas in New York City.

  1888. Jan. 25. Wagner's opera "Goetterdaemmerung" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Lilli Lehmann,
    Seidl-Krauss, Marianne Brandt, Albert Niemann, and Emil Fischer
    in the cast. Anton Seidl conducting.

  1888. Jan. 26. Production of Arthur Foote's cantata "The Wreck of
    the Hesperus" by the Cecilia Society in Boston.

  1888. Jan. 28. C. Villiers Stanford's "Irish Symphony" given by
    the Symphony Society in New York City.

  1888. Jan. 28. Otto Floersheim's "Elevation" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1888. Jan. 28. Scharwenka's "Arkadische Suite" given in New York
    City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1888. Feb. 4. Chaikovsky's suite "Mozartiana" given by Theodore
    Thomas in New York City.

  1888. Feb. 16. Rubinstein's Second Concerto for cello given by the
    Philadelphia orchestra, with Victor Herbert as soloist. Theodore
    Thomas conductor.

  1888. Feb. 18. H. Graedener's Overture given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1888. Feb. 24. Liszt's psalm "O Salutaris" for mezzo-soprano,
    chorus and orchestra, given by the Symphony Society in New York
    City, with Marianne Brandt as soloist.

  1888. Feb. 25. Wagner's only Symphony (in C) given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1888. Feb. 28. Bungert's symphonic poem "Auf der Wartburg," and F.
    Cowen's Fifth Symphony (in F) given by Theodore Thomas in New
    York City.

  1888. Mar. 2. Harry Rowe Shelley's "Grand Sonata" given by
    Theodore Thomas in New York City.

  1888. Mar. 8. R. Strauss's symphonic fantasia "Aus Italien" given
    by Theodore Thomas in Philadelphia.

  1888. Mar. 16. A. Bruckner's Fourth (Romantic) Symphony (E flat)
    given at a concert in Chickering Hall, New York City, under
    direction of Anton Seidl.

  1888. Mar. 17. Mozart's Violoncello Concerto (Op. 193) given in
    New York City by Theodore Thomas.

  1888. April 3. MacDowell's First Pianoforte Concerto given at a
    concert under direction of B. J. Lang, with B. F. Whelpley as
    soloist, in Boston.

  1888. April 6. Haydn's "Bear Symphony" (C major) given by Anton
    Seidl at a concert in Chickering Hall, New York City.

  1888. April 7. Karl Goldmark's Second Symphony (E flat major)
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1888. April 14. Rheinberger's "Passacaglia" and Praeger's
    symphonic poem "Life and Love, Battle and Victory" given in New
    York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1888. April 16. Verdi's opera "Otello" presented at the Academy of
    Music, New York City, under the management of Italo Campanini,
    with Eva Tetrazzini as _Desdemona_, Campanini as _Otello_,
    Scalchi as _Emilia_, and Galassi as _Iago_. Conductor Cleofonte
    Campanini.

  1888. July 19. Dvo[vr]ak's Symphonic Variations (Op. 78) given in
    Chicago, by Theodore Thomas.

  1888. Oct. 27. Overture to Peter Cornelius's opera "The Barber of
    Bagdad" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1888. Nov. 10. The entr'acte to von Weber's "The Three Pintos,"
    also Liszt's "Vogelpredigt des Heiligen Franz von Assisi," given
    at a concert at Chickering Hall, New York City, under Anton
    Seidl. At this concert Fritz Kreisler, noted Austrian violinist,
    made his American debut.

  1888. Nov. 13. American debut of Moritz Rosenthal, noted pianist,
    at Steinway Hall, New York City.

  1888. Nov. 17. Dvo[vr]ak's "Slavonic Dances" (third and fourth
    series) given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1888. Nov. 22. Felix Draeseke's "Serenata" given by the Symphony
    Society, in New York City.

  1888. Nov. 24. Schubert's overture in E minor, and Bruch's
    Fantasia for Violin and Orchestra (Opus 46) given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1888. Nov. 24. Grieg's concert-overture "In Autumn" given at a
    concert of the Brooklyn Philharmonic Society, Theodore Thomas
    conducting.

  1888. Dec. 1. Vincent d'Indy's "Wallenstein Trilogy" and Victor
    Herbert's "Serenade," given at a concert in Chickering Hall, New
    York City, by Anton Seidl.

  1888. Dec. 8. Reyer's "Waking of the Valkyrie" given by Theodore
    Thomas, in New York City.

  1888. Dec. 29. A. Lindner's Concerto for Violoncello (Opus 34)
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1888. Dudley Buck's oratorio "The Light of Asia" given by the
    Newark, N. J., Harmonic Society. This work was produced in
    England in 1885.

  1889. Jan. 12. Gounod's opera "La Reine de Saba" presented in New
    Orleans, La.

  1889. Jan. 17. Wagner's "Traueme" given by Theodore Thomas in
    Chicago.

  1889. Jan. 19. First complete performance of Chaikovsky's Violin
    Concerto given in New York City, by Maud Powell.

  1889. Jan. 24. Grieg's first suite "Peer Gynt," and Chaikovsky's
    Introduction and Fugue, given by Theodore Thomas in New York
    City.

  1889. Mar. 5. MacDowell's Second Pianoforte Concerto (D minor) and
    Chaikovsky's Fifth Symphony (E minor) given at a concert in
    Chickering Hall, New York City, by Theodore Thomas.

  1889. Mar. 6. Bristow's overture "The Jibbenainosay" given by the
    Harlem Philharmonic Society, New York City, conducted by the
    composer.

  1889. Mar. 9. Mackenzie's overture to "Twelfth Night" given by
    Theodore Thomas, in New York City.

  1889. Mar. 14. Mackenzie's "Benedictus" given in New York City by
    Theodore Thomas.

  1889. Mar. 15. Chaikovsky's First Suite given in Brooklyn by
    Theodore Thomas.

  1889. Mar. 27. Edward Grell's "Missa Solemnis" performed by the
    Oratorio Society in New York City.

  1889. Mar. 28. Schumann's Fantasia for violin and orchestra given
    at a concert in New York City, under Theodore Thomas.

  1889. Mar. 30. Schubert's Overture in B given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1889. April 4. Brahms's Waltzes given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1889. April 20. J. K. Paine's symphonic poem, "An Island Fantasy"
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1889. Aug. E. C. Phelps's "Elegy" for orchestra, produced at
    Brighton Beach, New York, N. Y., by Anton Seidl.

  1889. Sept. 29. Brooklyn Symphony Orchestra organized by Carl
    Venth. Was in existence several years and produced a number of
    minor compositions by American composers.

  1889. Nov. 16. Eckert's Concerto for Violoncello (A minor), Max
    Bruch's "Kol Nidrei" for 'cello and orchestra given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1889. Nov. 23. Arthur Foote's Suite for Strings produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1889. Dec. 4. Karl Goldmark's overture "In the Spring" given at a
    concert of the Symphony Society in New York City.

  1889. Dec. 7. Brahms's Violin Concerto in D played by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra with Franz Kneisel as soloist.

  1889. Auditorium dedicated, in Chicago, Ill.




CHAPTER VII

1890-1900


The decade covered in this chapter was remarkable for progress in many
directions.

Large orchestras were established all over the country--Pittsburgh,
Cincinnati, San Francisco, Los Angeles, widely scattered cities, were
among those which made serious efforts in the orchestral line, and
performed large orchestral works.

America became in a still greater degree the hunting ground of the
musical star who came from Europe, and swept the country of its loose
dollars, appearing both as soloist with these orchestras, and giving
recitals in the various cities.

Among pianists we had Busoni, who was, for a time, resident in Boston,
Vladimir de Pachmann, the great interpreter of Chopin, who was immensely
popular for some twenty-five years, and Paderewski, whose progress
through the country was marked by previously unheard of demonstrations.
It is said that thousands of people traveled many miles to see the train
pass in which he was traveling. Alfred Reisenauer came in 1895,
Slivinski, Alberto Jonas, Raoul Pugno, Siloti and Dohnanyi, were among
those who made their first appearances in America during this decade.

There was also a large list of violin virtuosi beginning with Adolf
Brodsky, who was followed by Henri Marteau, Cesar Thomson, Ondriczek,
Burmester, Halir, Gregorovitch, Marsick, Maud MacCarthy, Petschnikof and
Madame Normann Neruda, who had been prominent in England for many years,
and was long past her prime when she visited America. But the greatest
artist of all was Eugen Ysaye, who first appeared in 1894, and who,
since the great war, has been conductor of the Cincinnati Orchestra.

Opera continued to flourish on misfortune. Henry Abbey, who had ruined
himself in driving out Mapleson, formed a partnership with John B.
Schoeffel and Maurice Grau, and for some years provided opera for the
country. Signor Luigi Arditi, who first appeared as conductor of the
Havana Company in about 1848, and had seen more operatic service in
America than any other conductor, made a brief but interesting estimate
of the impresarios under whom he had traveled during those years. "I
have come to the conclusion," he writes, "that Don Francesco Marty (of
the Havana Company) was the most generous of men, and Max Maretzek the
cleverest. Colonel Mapleson was decidedly the astutest of all directors,
... while to Henry Abbey must be attributed every straightforward and
honorable quality. Maurice Grau was the cleverest of _entrepreneurs_."

Among the singers brought here by this combination was Tamagno, who
appeared in 1890. The following season came Jean and Edouard de Reszke,
who reigned supreme for a number of years. Also two American singers who
had made reputations abroad,--Emma Eames and Marie van Zandt. In 1893
Nellie Melba and Emma Calve came; and in 1894 Pol Plancon. In 1896 the
Abbey and Grau combination collapsed. Abbey died soon after, and Grau
continued alone until 1903.

In 1895 Walter Damrosch made an effort, which extended over several
years, to reestablish German opera, at the Metropolitan Opera House.
This house, by the way, had been burned down in 1892, but was rebuilt
and opened again in the following year. Several new singers were brought
over from Germany, among them being Johanna Gadski.

In 1897 and 1898 Walter Damrosch joined forces with Charles A. Ellis,
the manager of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, who had already been
managing a company of which Melba was the star.

In 1896 Ernestine Schumann-Heink made her first American appearance in
Chicago, and the following year joined the Metropolitan Company. Also
Milka Ternina, an excellent artist, made her first appearance in Boston.

In 1898 Maurice Grau was the leading operatic impresario once more and
introduced several new singers, including Marie Brema, Suzanne Adams, an
American, and Marie Engle, also in 1900 another American, Louise Homer,
while of the men Albert Alvarez, a French tenor, and Antonio Scotti, an
Italian baritone, were the most brilliant stars.

Italian opera was now being pushed hard by German opera, while French
opera was very little heard. The table of performances published in New
York at the end of the season 1900-1901 shows that Wagner had
thirty-four performances out of a total of eighty-six. Gounod was next
with twelve performances, Verdi with eight, Puccini with eight,
Meyerbeer with five, Mascagni with four, Reyer and Massenet three each,
Boito, Mozart and Donizetti two each, and Beethoven, Leoncavallo and
Bizet one each.

American composers were seeking new themes indigenous to the soil. Many
had already written something under the title of "Rip van Winkle," and
Walter Damrosch had brought out an opera based on Hawthorne's novel "The
Scarlet Letter." Anton Dvo[vr]ak composed his "New World Symphony"
making use of negro melodies for his themes. The resources of the
Indians, the prairies and the mountains have been tapped more or less
successfully. The oil fields still offer a thrilling subject for the
composer.

  1890. Jan. 4. Peter Cornelius's opera "Der Barbier von Bagdad"
    presented at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, under
    Walter Damrosch, also J. Bayer's ballet "Die Puppensee," with
    Frank Damrosch conducting.

  1890. Jan. 4. Saint-Saens's Third Violin Concerto (B minor) given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra with T. Adamowski as soloist;
    also Borodin's First Symphony (E flat).

  1890. Jan. 11. Production of MacDowell's symphonic tone poem
    "Lancelot and Elaine," given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1890. Jan. 23. Edouard Lalo's opera "Le Roy d'Ys," presented at
    New Orleans, La., with Furst, Balleroy, Geoffroy, Rossi, Butat,
    Miss Leavinson and Mrs. Beretta in the caste.

  1890. Jan. 31. Brahms's "Liebeslieder Waltzes" given by the
    Symphony Society, in New York City.

  1890. Feb. 1. Chaikovsky's Fourth Symphony (F minor) given at a
    concert of the Symphony Society in New York City. W. Damrosch
    conducting.

  1890. Mar. 24. Debut of Tamagno, great Italian tenor, as _Otello_
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1890. Mar. 25. Dvo[vr]ak's Pianoforte Concerto in G minor, given
    at a concert in Chickering Hall, Boston, under B. J. Lang, with
    Benjamin L. Whelpley as soloist.

  1890. April 8. J. C. D. Parker's oratorio "St. John" produced by
    the Handel and Haydn Society in Boston.

  1890. Nov. 1. Goldmark's overture "Prometheus," and Sgambati's
    Pianoforte Concerto in G minor, given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1890. Nov. 15. Moszkowski's Second Suite given in New York City,
    by Theodore Thomas.

  1890. Nov. 20. Raff's overture to "Romeo and Juliet" given at a
    concert of the Cecilia Society in Boston.

  1890. Nov. 22. Haydn's Concerto for Violoncello given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra, with Anton Hekking as soloist, also
    Smetana's symphonic poem "Vltava."

  1890. Nov. 26. Franchetti's opera "Asraele," presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1890. Dec. 6. Goldmark's Violin Concerto in A minor given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra. F. Kneisel, soloist.

  1890. Dec. 10. Production of H. W. Parker's overture "Count de
    Paris" by the Manuscript Society in New York City. Also E. C.
    Phelps's "Meditation" for orchestra.

  1890. Dec. 12. Smareglia's opera "Der Vassall von Szigeth"
    presented at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1890. Dec. 12. Richard Burmeister's Pianoforte Concerto given by
    the Symphony Society in New York City, with the composer as
    soloist.

  1890. Dec. Leopold Godowski, who had previously toured America as
    accompanist for Ovide Musin, made his first recital-tour.

  1890. Grand opera given by Abbey and Schoeffel with a company
    including Adelina Patti, Emma Albani, Lillian Nordica, Fabbri,
    Carbone, Ravelli, Tamagno and others.

  1891. Jan. 9. The Duke of Saxe-Coburg Gotha's opera "Diana von
    Solange," presented at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York
    City.

  1891. Jan. 10. Joachim's Violin Concerto in G given by Theodore
    Thomas in New York City, and on the 17th, Rubinstein's overture
    to "Antony and Cleopatra" in Brooklyn, N. Y.

  1891. Jan. 23. Debut of Xaver Scharwenka in concert at
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1891. Jan. 24. Arthur Foote's symphonic prologue "Francesca da
    Rimini" produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1891. Feb. 4. Chaikovsky's overture fantasia "Hamlet" given by
    Theodore Thomas in Brooklyn, N. Y.

  1891. Feb. 5. Massenet's cantata "Eve" given by the New York
    Chorus Society at Lenox Lyceum, New York City.

  1891. Feb. 23. Dudley Buck's Romance, for Four Horns and
    Orchestra, played at an American Composers' Concert in New York
    City, under Mortimer Wiske. Also H. R. Shelley's Concerto for
    Violin.

  1891. Mar. 7. Klughardt's Third Symphony (D major) given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1891. Mar. 14. Paderewski's Pianoforte Concerto in A minor given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, with Madame Julie Rive-King as
    soloist.

  1891. April 2. G. W. Chadwick's ode, "The Pilgrims' Hymn,"
    produced by the Cecilia Society, Boston.

  1891. April 10. Dudley Buck's overture "The Star Spangled Banner"
    produced at the "Tribune" Celebration in New York City.

  1891. April 15. Massenet's suite "Esclarmonde" given in Chicago,
    by Theodore Thomas. Produced as an opera in New Orleans, 1893.
    Feb. 10.

  1891. April 29. Balakirev's oriental fantasia "Islamei" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra, with Arthur Friedheim, soloist.

  1891. May 5. Berlioz's "Te Deum" given by the Oratorio Society in
    New York City, at the opening of Carnegie Hall.

  1891. May 8. Chaikovsky's "Legend" and "Paternoster" given by the
    Oratorio Society, New York City, conducted by the composer.

  1891. Sept. 9. Mascagni's opera "Cavalleria Rusticana" given in
    Philadelphia, under Gustav Hinrichs.

  1891. Sept. 23. Dr. J. F. Bridge's dramatic oratorio "The
    Repentance of Nineveh" given at the Worcester (Mass.) Musical
    Festival.

  1891. Sept. 24. Also Victor Herbert's dramatic cantata "The
    Captive."

  1891. Sept. 24. MacDowell's suite in A minor, and

  1891. Sept. 25. Handel's "Overture to an Occasional Oratorio."

  1891. Oct. 31. Richard Strauss's tone poem "Don Juan" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra, A. Nikisch conducting.

  1891. Nov. 3. American debut of Adolf Brodsky, noted violinist,
    with the New York Symphony Society, in Brahms's concerto.

  1891. Nov. 5. Liszt's symphonic poem "Hungaria" given at a concert
    of the Philharmonic Orchestra in the Tremont Theatre, Boston,
    with Bernhard Listemann as conductor.

  1891. Nov. 13. American debut of Ferruccio Busoni, pianist, with
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra in Beethoven's Fourth Concerto.

  1891. Nov. 18. American debut of Ignace Paderewski, noted Polish
    pianist, in Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1891. Nov. 21. Production of C. M. Loeffler's suite for violin and
    orchestra, "Les Viellees de l'Ukraine," by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1891. Nov. 29. Berlioz's "Le 5 Mai," for bass solo, chorus and
    orchestra given by the Cecilia Society in Boston.

  1891. Dec. 8. Rimsky-Korsakof's second symphony "Antar" given by
    the Arion Society, New York City, F. van der Stucken, conductor.

  1891. Dec. 14. American debut of Jean (tenor) and Edouard (bass)
    de Reszke in "Romeo et Juliette" at the Metropolitan Opera
    House, New York City.

  1891. Dec. 21. American debut of Marie van Zandt, American
    soprano, as _Amina_ in "La Sonnambula" at the Metropolitan Opera
    House, New York City.

  1891. Dec. 25. Reyer's opera "Sigurd" presented at the French
    Opera House, New Orleans, La.

  1891. Dec. 26. Handel's Concerto in F major for strings and two
    wind instruments, given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1878. Dec. 21. Chaikovsky's fantasia "Francesca da Rimini" given
    by the Philharmonic Society, New York.

  1891. The Chicago Symphony Orchestra established, with Theodore
    Thomas as conductor.

  1892. Jan. 6. Litolff's overture to "King Lear" played at a Young
    People's Concert of the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1892. Jan. 9. Strauss's tone poem "Tod und Verklaerung" given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City, Theodore Thomas
    conducting.

  1892. Jan. 10. Chadwick's "A Pastoral Prelude" produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1892. Jan. 15. American debut of Jean Lasalle, noted French
    baritone, as _Nelusko_ in "L'Africaine" at the Metropolitan
    Opera House, New York City.

  1892. Jan. 29. P. Scharwenka's symphonic poem "Fruehlingswogen"
    given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra. Theodore Thomas
    conductor.

  1892. Feb. 5. Max Bruch's Second Concerto for Violin given by the
    New York Symphony Society with Geraldine Morgan, soloist.

  1892. Feb. 6. First recital of Vladimir de Pachmann, Russian
    pianist, at Chickering Hall, New York City.

  1892. Feb. 13. Massenet's opera "Herodiade" presented at the
    French Opera House, New Orleans. (Given in New York, Nov. 8,
    1909, by Hammerstein.)

  1892. Feb. 20. F. Busoni's Symphonic Suite (Op. 23), three
    movements, given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1892. Feb. 27. A. Dvo[vr]ak's Fourth Symphony (G major) and
    Borodin's "A Prairie Scene" given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1892. April 1. R. Strauss's symphonic poem "Macbeth" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1892. April 16. Suite from G. Henschel's music to "Hamlet" played
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, conducted by the composer.

  1892. May 5. G. W. Chadwick's cantata "Phoenix Expirans" produced
    at the Springfield, Mass., Festival.

  1892. Aug. 1. John Philip Sousa, noted bandmaster, resigned from
    the Marine Corps, and organized his band, which gained a
    world-wide reputation.

  1892. Aug. 27. Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, destroyed
    by fire.

  1892. Oct. 21. A. Dvo[vr]ak's "Carnival" and "Otello" overtures
    presented at a concert given under the auspices of the National
    Conservatory of Music in New York City, in honor of the
    composer's first appearance in America.

  1892. Oct. 21. The music of Moritz Moszkowski's opera "Boabdil"
    given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra. Also J. Strauss's waltz
    "Seid umschlungen Millionen."

  1892. Oct. 22. Chaikovsky's suite "Le Casse-Noisette" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1892. Oct. 22. Saint-Saens's Second Symphony (A minor) given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1892. Oct. 22. Production of J. K. Paine's "Columbus March and
    Hymn," and George W. Chadwick's "Columbian Ode," at the
    dedication of the Music Building at the World's Fair in Chicago,
    Ill., under Theodore Thomas.

  1892. Nov. 11. Hamish McCunn's concert overture "The Land of the
    Mountain and Flood" given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1892. Dec. 2. Cherubini's Overture given in New York City.

  1892. Dec. 17. P. Gilson's symphonic sketches, "La Mer," given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1892. Peoples' Choral Union organized in New York City, by Frank
    Damrosch.

  1893. Jan. 4. Saint-Saens's opera "Samson et Dalila" presented at
    the French Opera House, New Orleans, with Renaud and Madame
    Mounier in the leading parts.

  1893. Jan. 24. Moritz Moszkowski's opera "Boabdil" presented at
    the Manhattan Opera House, New York.

  1893. Jan. 31. P. Mascagni's opera "L'Amico Fritz" given its first
    complete stage performance in America by Walter Damrosch at
    Carnegie Hall, New York City. (A performance had been given June
    8, 1892, by Gustav Heinrichs, in Philadelphia.)

  1893. Feb. 3. Fuchs's Serenade for Strings and Two Horns given by
    the New York Symphony Society.

  1893. Feb. 4. Arthur Foote's ballad "The Skeleton in Armor" for
    chorus, quartet and orchestra, produced by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1893. Mar. 4. G. Riemenschneider's "Toedtentanz" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1884. Feb. 3. Volkmann's Violoncello Concerto given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1893. Mar. 17. Edgar Tinel's oratorio "St. Francis d'Assisi" given
    by the Oratorio Society, New York City.

  1893. April 8. Margaret Ruthven Lang's "Dramatic Overture"
    produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1893. April 15. F. Busoni's Symphonic Tone Poem produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1893. May 3. H. W. Parker's oratorio "Hora Novissima" produced by
    the Church Choral Society in New York City.

  1893. June. Musorgsky's "Une Nuit sur le Mont Chauve" said to have
    been played in a series of Russian concerts at the World's
    Columbian Exposition (June 5-13) with V. T. Hlavac, conductor.

  1893. June 6. Balakiref's Overture on Russian Themes given at the
    Chicago Exposition at a concert of Russian music, and on June 7,
    Glazunof's "Triumphal March."

  1895. June 12. Arthur Bird's Third Orchestral Suite given at the
    Chicago (Ill.) Exposition.

  1893. July 7. Harry Rowe Shelley's "Carnival Overture" produced at
    the Chicago Exposition, and on the 19th his suite "The Ruined
    Castle."

  1893. July 29. Margaret Ruthven Lang's overture "Witches" produced
    at the Chicago Exposition.

  1893. Aug. Bizet's opera, "The Pearl Fishers," given in English in
    Philadelphia.

  1893. Nov. 16. Scholz's suite, "Wanderings," given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1893. Nov. 16. Gounod's opera "Philemon et Baucis" given in
    English by the Duff Opera Company, at Herrman's Theatre, New
    York City.

  1893. Nov. 24. G. Charpentier's orchestral suite "Impressions
    d'Italie" given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1893. Nov. 27. New Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, opened
    with a performance of "Faust," at which Pol Plancon, noted
    French basso, made his American debut.

  1893. Nov. 29. American debut of Emma Calve, noted French
    mezzo-soprano, as _Santuzza_, in "Cavalleria Rusticana" at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1893. Dec. 2. American debut of Richard Burmeister, pianist, at
    Carnegie Hall, New York City, with the Damrosch Orchestra.

  1893. Dec. 3. F. A. Lamond's overture "From the Highlands" given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1893. Dec. 4. American debut of Nellie Melba, great Australian
    soprano, in "Lucia di Lammermoor" at the Metropolitan Opera
    House, New York City.

  1893. Dec. 5. First appearance in America of Josef Slivinski,
    Polish pianist, at a concert in Madison Square Hall, New York
    City.

  1893. Dec. 9. Alberto Jonas, noted Spanish pianist, made his
    American debut in Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1893. Dec. American debut of Sigrid Arnoldson, soprano, in
    Gounod's opera "Philemon et Baucis," at the Metropolitan Opera
    House, New York City.

  1893. Dec. 9. Sinding's First Symphony (D minor) given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1893. Dec. 15. Dvo[vr]ak's symphony in E minor "From the New
    World" produced by the Philharmonic Society in New York City.
    (Played from MS.)

  1893. Dec. 28. Sgambati's "Te Deum" performed in Chicago, Ill.,
    under directorship of Theodore Thomas.

  1893. Dec. 30. Chaikovsky's "1812" overture given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1893. Henri Marteau, violinist, made his first American concert
    tour.

  1893. The Pittsburgh (Pa.) Symphony Orchestra organized under
    Frederick Archer.

  1893. Emil Paur appointed conductor of the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1893-4. Abbey and Grau presented grand opera with a company which
    included as newcomers, Emma Calve, Nellie Melba, Sigrid
    Arnoldson, Pol Plancon, Gurin, Dufriche and Vignas.

  1894. Jan. 5. Dvo[vr]ak's Concerto for Violin given by the New
    York City Symphony Society, with Henri Marteau as soloist.

  1894. Jan. 27. Liszt's rhapsody "Espagnole" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1894. Feb. 3. Moszkowski's "Torchlight Dance" given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1894. Feb. 3. Loeffler's "Concerto Fantastique" for Violoncello,
    produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, and at the same
    concert d'Albert's overture to "Esther" was played for the first
    time in America.

  1894. Feb. 7. Hartmann's overture "Nordische Meerfahrt," Bruch's
    "Romanza" (Opus 42), and Saint-Saens's "Morceau de Concert,"
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1894. Mar. 16. Chaikovsky's Sixth Symphony given by the Symphony
    Society in New York City, and Victor Herbert's Second
    Violoncello Concerto, with the composer as soloist.

  1894. April. Edgar  Stillman Kelley's "Aladdin" and "A Chinese
    Suite for Orchestra," San Francisco, Cal.

  1894. April 7. Hans von Buelow's "Funerale" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1894. April 20. Massenet's opera "Werther" given at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Eames, Arnoldson
    and Jean de Reszke in leading parts; Mancinelli conducting.

  1894. May 23. Goldmark's overture to "Sappho" given in Cincinnati,
    O., under Theodore Thomas.

  1894. May 25. Second and third tableaux from Rubinstein's sacred
    opera "Moses," given by Theodore Thomas in Cincinnati, O.

  1894. June 15. Leoncavallo's opera "I Pagliacci" presented in New
    York with Kronold, Montegriffo and Campanari.

  1894. Aug. 29. Puccini's opera "Manon Lescaut" presented at the
    Grand Opera House, Philadelphia, with Selma Kronold and
    Montegriffo.

  1894. Sept. 27. Handel's Concerto (No. 7, in B flat) for organ and
    orchestra given at the Worcester (Mass.) Festival, with William
    C. Carl as soloist.

  1894. Oct. 19. G. W. Chadwick's Third Symphony (F major) produced
    by Boston Symphony Orchestra. (This work won the prize offered
    by the National Conservatory.)

  1894. Oct. 30. American debut of Cesar Thomson, noted Belgian
    violinist, at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1894. Nov. 17. P. Benoit's Symphonic Poem for flute and orchestra
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1894. Nov. 25. American debut of Eugen Ysaye, great Belgian
    violinist, in a concert at the Metropolitan Opera House, New
    York City.

  1894. Dec. 7. Joachim's "Theme and Variations" for violin, given
    by the Symphony Society, New York City, with Eugen Ysaye as
    soloist.

  1894. Dec. 17. Bemberg's opera "Elaine" (libretto by Paul Ferrier)
    presented at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with
    Melba, Mantelli, J. and E. de Reszke, Plancon and Castelmary.

  1894. Dec. 28. Goldmark's Scherzo (Op. 45) given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1894. Dec. 29. Henry Holden Huss's Pianoforte Concerto in B major
    produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, with the composer as
    soloist.

  1895. Jan. 5. C. M. Loeffler's Divertimento in A minor, produced
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. Jan. 15. American debut of Sybil Sanderson, American
    soprano, as _Manon_, at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York
    City.

  1895. Jan. 25. A. Mackenzie's nautical overture "Britannica" given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. Feb. 4. Verdi's opera "Falstaff" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Emma Eames, Zelie
    de Lussan, Scalchi, Campanari, and Maurel. Mancinelli
    conducting.

  1895. Feb. 8. Cecile Chaminade's "Concertstuecke," for orchestra,
    given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. Feb. 16. Gustav Strube's overture to "The Maid of Orleans"
    produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. Feb. 21. Howard LeGrand's oratorio "The Resurrection" given
    by the Church Choral Society, New York City.

  1895. Feb. 22. Rheinberger's Concerto in G minor, for organ, given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. Feb. 28. Maurice Arnold's "American Plantation Dances" given
    by the American Symphony Orchestra, New York City.

  1895. Mar. 1. American debut of Johanna Gadski, soprano, as _Elsa_
    in "Lohengrin" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1895. Mar. 23. Marschner's overture to "Hans Heiling," and
    Reinecke's entr'acte of "Der Gouverneur von Tours" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra; also R. Kahn's overture in C minor
    "Elegie" produced (from MS.). "Hans Heiling" played 1856. April
    19. by the Philharmonic Society, New York.

  1895. Mar. 30. H. Goetz's "Spring Overture"; Knorr's "Variations
    on an Ukraine Folk Song," and H. W. Parker's Rhapsody for
    baritone and orchestra, given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. April 14. J. C. D. Parker's oratorio "The Life of Man"
    produced by the Handel and Haydn Society in Boston.

  1895. Oct. 6. Humperdinck's opera "Haensel und Gretel" given in
    English in New York City at Daly's Theatre, with Alice Gordon,
    Marie Elba, Louise Meisslinger, Jacques Bars, C. Brane and E.
    Johnson. A. Seidl, conductor.

  1895. Oct. 19. Mozart's Andante and Variations in D minor given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. Oct. 25. Smetana's symphonic poem "Sarka," and Edward
    German's "Three Dances of the Time of Henry VIII," given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. Nov. 1. The _Vorspiel_ to R. Strauss's opera "Guntram" given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. Nov. 1. Rameau's suite de ballet from "Acanthe et Cephise"
    and the Prelude to the third act of R. Strauss's opera "Guntram"
    given by the Symphony Society in New York City.

  1895. Nov. Symphony Orchestra organized in San Francisco, Cal.,
    with Fritz Scheel as conductor.

  1895. Nov. 4. Paderewski's "Polish Fantasia" given at a concert in
    Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1895. Nov. 8. Cesar Franck's symphonic poem "Les Sylphides," given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. Nov. 15. The ballet music from Massenet's opera "Thais," and
    Strauss's tone poem "Till Eulenspiegel," given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. Nov. 15. American debut of Franz Ondriczek, violinist, at a
    concert of the Philharmonic Society, New York City, in
    Dvo[vr]ak's A minor Concerto for violin.

  1895. Nov. 29. American debut of Giuseppe Cremonini, tenor, at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1895. Nov. 30. The Prelude to d'Albert's opera "Der Rubin" played
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. Dec. 7. Reznicek's overture to the opera "Donna Diana" given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1895. Dec. 11. Massenet's opera "La Navarraise" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Emma Calve in the
    title-role.

  1895. Dec. 17. American debut of Yvette Guilbert at Hammerstein's
    Music Hall, New York. N. Y.

  1895. Willy Burmester, violinist, toured the United States.

  1895. Alfred Reisenauer, pianist, first appeared in America.

  1895. Cincinnati Orchestral Association founded, with Frank van
    der Stucken as conductor.

  1895-6. German opera given in New York and several of the large
    cities by Walter Damrosch, with a company including Johanna
    Gadski, Marie Brema, Rose Sucher, Rothmuehl (tenor) and others.

  1896. Jan. 4. Lalo's Suite "Namouna," given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1896. Jan. 23. Edward MacDowell's "Indian Suite" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra at the Metropolitan Opera House, New
    York City.

  1896. American debut of Milka Ternina, soprano, as _Brunnhilde_ in
    "Die Walkuere" in Boston.

  1896. Feb. 7. Chaikovsky's First Symphony (G minor) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1896. Feb. 11. Stage production of Walter Damrosch's opera "The
    Scarlet Letter," at the Boston Theatre, Boston, Mass., with
    Gadski, Berthald and Mertens.

  1896. Feb. 13. Scharwenka's opera "Mataswintha" given in concert
    form by the Manuscript Society in New York City.

  1896. Feb. 22. H. Zoellner's orchestral fantasia "Midnight at
    Sedan" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1896. Mar. 21. "Three Hungarian Dances" by Brahms, given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1896. April 4. Production of Gustav Strube's Symphony in C minor,
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1896. April 17. Handel's Concerto in F, for strings, given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra, and on the 24th Smetana's symphonic
    poem "Vysehrad."

  1896. April 24. Henschel's "Stabat Mater" given by the Oratorio
    Society, New York City, conducted by the composer.

  1896. Oct. 17. Bourgault-Ducoudray's "L'Interrement d'Ophelie"
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1896. Oct. 23. Balakireff's symphonic poem "Thamar" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1896. Oct. 24. Chabrier's Overture to "Gwendoline" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1896. Oct. 31. Production of Mrs. H. H. A. Beach's "Gaelic
    Symphony" (from MS.) by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1896. Nov. 7. The "Sevilliana" from Massenet's opera "Don Cesar de
    Bazan" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1896. Nov. 8. American debut of Karl Halir, violinist, in
    Beethoven's Violin Concerto, with the Philharmonic Society, New
    York City.

  1896. Nov. 13. Giordano's opera "Andrea Chenier" given at the
    Academy of Music, New York City, by Mapleson, with
    Bonaplato-Bau, Scalchi and Durot.

  1896. Nov. 13. Smetana's symphonic poem "Richard III," Duparc's
    symphonic poem "Lenore," and Glazunof's "Oriental Rhapsody,"
    given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1896. Nov. 21. The Intermezzo from Goldmark's opera "Das Heimchen
    am Herd" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1896. Nov. 24. American debut of C. Gregorovitch, violinist, at
    Chickering Hall, New York City, with the American Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1896. Dec. 11. Roentgen's "Ballad on a Norwegian Folk Song" given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1896. Dec. 19. Dvo[vr]ak's Violoncello Concerto in B minor, given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra. Schroeder, soloist.

  1896. Dec. 26. Selections from Gluck's ballet, "Don Juan," and
    from Humperdinck's opera "Koenigskinder," also Handel's First
    Overture, in D minor, given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1896. American debut of Jacques Bars, tenor, in "Haensel und
    Gretel" at Daly's Theatre, New York City.

  1896. Margaret Ruthven Lang's "Sappho's Prayer" produced in New
    York City.

  1896. Los Angeles (Cal.) Symphony Orchestra organized.

  1896. Martin Marsick, violinist, made his first tour in America.

  1897. Jan. 1. Dvo[vr]ak's tone poem "The Golden Spinning Wheel"
    given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1897. Jan. 2. Smetana's symphonic poem "Wallenstein's Lager" given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1897. Jan. 8. Rimsky-Korsakof's suite "Mlada" given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1897. Jan. 16. Dittersdorf's Symphony in C major, given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1897. Feb. 4. Dvo[vr]ak's symphonic poem "The Water Fay" given at
    a concert of the Seidl Society at the Academy of Music, New York
    City.

  1897. Feb. 5. R. Strauss's tone poem, "Also sprach Zarathustra,"
    given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1897. Feb. 12. Massenet's opera "Le Cid" given at the Metropolitan
    Opera House, New York City, with Felia Litvinne, Clementine de
    Vere, J. Bars, J. de Reszke, Pol Plancon, J. Lasalle and E. de
    Reszke. Mancinelli conducting.

  1897. Mar. 6. Arthur Whiting's Fantasy for pianoforte and
    orchestra in B flat minor, given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1897. Mar 17. J. W. Glover's oratorio "St. Patrick at Tara" given
    at the Lexington Opera House, New York City.

  1897. Mar. 24. Mozart's Symphony in A major given by the American
    Symphony Society in Chickering Hall, New York City. Sam Franko,
    conductor.

  1897. April 3. Dvo[vr]ak's Rondo for Violoncello (Op. 94) given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1897. April 17. Rimsky-Korsakof's symphonic suite "Scheherazade"
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1897. June 25. H. R. Shelley's Symphony in E flat played at the
    Music Teachers National Association Convention in New York City.

  1897. Sept. 22. Production of Gustav Strube's Violin Concerto (Op.
    13) at the Worcester (Mass.) Festival, with F. Kneisel as
    soloist.

  1897. Oct. 16. Glazunof's "Poeme Lyrique" (Op. 42) given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1897. Oct. 23. Rimsky-Korsakof's overture on Russian church
    themes, "La Grand Paque Russe," and Gernsheim's Violin Concerto
    in D major, given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1897. Oct. 29. Glazunof's Second Concert Waltz given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra, and on the 4th Nov. Glazunof's
    tableaux musicales "Printemps."

  1897. Nov. 26. Chaikovsky's symphonic ballad "Voyvode" given by
    the Symphony Society in New York City.

  1897. Dec. 3. Introduction to Act II of d'Albert's opera "Gernot,"
    given by the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra. Frederick Archer
    conductor.

  1897. Dec. Production of Henry K. Hadley's First Symphony under
    direction of Anton Seidl, in New York City.

  1897. Dec. 10. Raoul Pugno, French pianist, first appeared in the
    United States.

  1897. Dec. 13. Massenet's opera "Le Portrait de Manon" given in
    French by the Society of Musical Arts, at the Astoria, New York
    City. Also C. Chaminade's ballet "Callirhoe," and on Dec. 21, an
    opera by V. Thompson and Aime Lachaume, "In Old Japan," was
    produced.

  1897-8. The Damrosch-Ellis Opera Company gave grand opera
    throughout the country with artists including Melba, Nordica,
    Gadski, soprani; van Cauteren and Mattfeld, contralti; Kraus,
    Salignac, Rothmuehl and Ibos, tenors; Stehman, Fischer, and
    Boudouresque, basses.

  1898. Jan. 7. Hugo Kaun's "Festival March and Hymn" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1898. Jan. 8. Siegfried Wagner's symphonic poem "Sehnsucht" given
    by the Philharmonic Society in New York City.

  1898. Jan. 8. Production of C.M. Loeffler's dramatic poem, "La
    mort de Tintagiles" by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1898. Jan. 14. Hugo Kaun's Symphony in D minor given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1898. Jan. 15. Paganini's "Caprice" for violin, in A minor, given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1898. Jan. 25. American debut of Alexander Siloti, famous Russian
    pianist, as a concert given by Anton Seidl at the Astoria, New
    York City.

  1898. Jan. 27. Production of Gustav Strube's overture for
    trumpets, horns, tuba and kettledrums, at a concert of the
    Apollo Club in Boston.

  1898. Jan. 27. Dubois's Concerto for Violin, in D minor, given by
    the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra with Henri Marteau as soloist.

  1898. Jan. 29. Cesar Franck's symphonic poem "The Wild Huntsman"
    given at Cincinnati, O., by Theodore Thomas.

  1898. Nov. 12. Chaikovsky's Second Pianoforte Concerto (G major)
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York. Alexander Siloti,
    soloist.

  1898. Feb. 26. A. Goring Thomas's cantata "The Swan and the
    Skylark" given at a Seidl Concert in the Metropolitan Opera
    House, New York City.

  1898. Mar. 1. H. H. Huss's dramatic scene, "Cleopatra's Death,"
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City, under A.
    Seidl.

  1898. Mar. 5. Glazunof's Fifth Symphony (B flat major) given by
    the Philharmonic Society in New York City. A Seidl conductor.

  1898. Mar. 7. Saint-Saens's Fifth Pianoforte Concerto given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra in New York City, with Raoul Pugno as
    soloist. Also Cesar Franck's "Variations Symphoniques."

  1898. Mar. Puccini's opera "La Boheme" presented in San Francisco,
    Cal., by the Royal Italian Opera Company. (Given by same company
    in New York, May 10.)

  1898. April 7. F. Weingaertner's symphonic poem, "The Elysian
    Fields," given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1898. Horatio Parker's oratorio "St. Christopher" given by the
    Oratorio Society, New York City.

  1898. April 23. D'Indy's symphonic variations "Istar" given by
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra. Theodore Thomas, conductor.

  1898. Oct. 22. Chausson's symphonic poem "Viviane," and
    Mackenzie's three dances for "The Little Minister" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1898. Nov. 7. American debut of Ernestine Schumann-Heink, as
    _Ortrud_ in "Lohengrin," in Chicago.

  1898. Nov. 8. American debut of Albert Saleza, tenor, as _Romeo_,
    in Chicago.

  1898. Nov. 29. American debut of Ernest van Dyck, as _Tannhaeuser_,
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1898. Dec. 3. First performance of Walter Damrosch's "Manilla Te
    Deum" given by the Oratorio Society of New York City.

  1898. Dec. 14. American debut of Anton van Rooy, as _Wotan_ in
    "Die Walkuere" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1898. Dec. 25. American debut of Maud MacCarthy, violinist, at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1898. Borodin's Symphony in B minor first played in America by the
    Cincinnati Orchestra.

  1898. Victor Herbert appointed conductor of the Pittsburgh
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1899. Jan. 4. American debut of Suzanne Adams, American soprano,
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1899. Jan. 7. R. Strauss's tone poem "Don Quixote," given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1899. Jan. 12. Gounod's opera "La Reine de Saba," presented at the
    French Opera House, New Orleans, La.

  1899. Jan. 17. F. S. Converse's Symphony in D minor (first
    movement) given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1899. Jan. 17. Grieg's Symphonic Dances given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1899. Feb. 3. Hugo Kaun's overture "Der Maler von Antwerpen" given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1899. Feb. 7. American debut of Albert Alvarez, French operatic
    tenor, as _Romeo_, in Boston, at the Boston Theatre.

  1899. Feb. 8. American debut of Lady Halle (Normann Neruda), noted
    violinist, with the Boston Symphony Orchestra. She played
    Spohr's Violin Concerto in C minor.

  1899. Mar. 4. Chabrier's "Bourree Fantastique" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1899. Mar. 10. Mancinelli's opera "Ero e Leandro" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, conducted by the
    composer.

  1899. Mar. 22. American debut of E. Dohnanyi, Hungarian pianist,
    with Boston Symphony Orchestra at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1899. Mar. 25. Cesar Franck's oratorio "The Beatitudes" given by
    the Liederkranz Society of New York City.

  1899. April. 15. Cesar Franck's Symphony in D Minor given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1899. April 24. Perosi's oratorio "The Transfiguration of Christ"
    given by the Cecilia Society of Boston.

  1899. Oct. 14. Arensky's Pianoforte Concerto in F minor, given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra with Katherine Goodson as soloist.

  1899. Oct. 20. Dvo[vr]ak's tone poem, "The Wild Dove," given by
    the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1899. Oct. 21. Lalo's Violoncello Concerto in D minor, and
    Glazunof's Sixth Symphony (G minor) given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1899. Oct. The Society of American Musicians and Composers
    organized to succeed the MS. Society of New York City.

  1899. Nov. 3. American debut of Mark Hambourg, pianist, in Boston
    with the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1899. Nov. 4. Siegfried Wagner's opera "Der Baerenhaeuter," and W.
    Berger's Symphony in B flat major, given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1899. Nov. 17. American debut of A. Petchnikof, violinist, with
    the Philharmonic Orchestra, New York City.

  1899. Nov. 18. Dvo[vr]ak's symphonic poem (Op. 111), "Pisen
    Bohatyrska" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1899. Dec. 9. F. Draeseke's "Jubel Overture" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1899. Dec. 23. American debut of Antonio Scotti, noted baritone,
    as _Don Giovanni_ at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York
    City.

  1899. Dec. 30. H. W. Parker's "Northern Ballad" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.




CHAPTER VIII

1900


The first decade of the twentieth century was noteworthy for the
establishment of orchestras throughout the land. During the nineteenth
century the development of the resources of the country and the increase
of its wealth and population was phenomenal. In 1900 the population of
the United States was about seventy-five millions. Chicago, which was
practically non-existent in 1800, had a population of about two millions
and was already a rival of New York. Railroads, unknown at the beginning
of the nineteenth century, had covered the country with a network of
communications and caused the growth of large cities in places far
remote from the civilization of the year 1800.

We find Minneapolis establishing an orchestra in 1902, St. Paul in 1905,
New Orleans in 1906, Seattle in 1908, while the Symphony Society of New
York was reorganized in 1905, and a Russian Symphony orchestra
established in New York City. The term "Symphony Orchestra" has been
universally adopted, till we have symphony orchestras even in the moving
picture houses. In Grove's Dictionary (edition of 1890) the only
symphony orchestra mentioned is "the Boston Symphony Orchestra," though
the "Symphony Society" of New York is also listed. It seems then that
the term "symphony" applied to an orchestra is an American qualification
signifying complete equipment, and at least good intentions.

During this period the New York Philharmonic Society adopted the plan,
for three successive years, of engaging visiting, or guest conductors,
and in this way a number of the most prominent European conductors were
introduced to the American public.

A few American composers emerged, and of them the most frequently found
were Frederick S. Converse and Henry K. Hadley, of whose works several
were produced by the leading orchestras and opera companies.

The list of virtuosi is also long. Among pianists Harold Bauer and Ossip
Gabrilovitsch appeared in 1900, and later came Rudolf Ganz, Josef
Lhevinne, Katherine Goodson, and Serge Rachmaninof. Among violinists,
Kubelik, Kocian, Hugo Heermann, Jacques Thibaud, Efrem Zimbalist and
Arthur Spalding, only the last being of American birth.

The list of singers is long, and is chiefly associated with opera.
Louise Homer, an American, made her debut in 1900, and Geraldine Farrar,
another American, in 1906. Among other noted singers we find, Lucienne
Breval, Caruso, Fremstad, Tetrazzini, Bonci, Renaud, Chaliapin, Morena,
Destinn, Mary Garden, John McCormack, Edouard Clement, and
Slezak,--samples of many nationalities.

This brings us to the opera. Maurice Grau resigned from the directorship
of the Metropolitan Opera House in 1903. Grau brought the star system to
a climax, and gave opera with "all star casts," but few new operas were
presented under his management. In 1903 Heinrich Conried succeeded to
the management of the Metropolitan Opera House, and set himself to work
to abolish the star system, as far as possible, and produce a good
ensemble. The abolition of the star system proved an impossibility,
because people had been fed upon it since the musical life of the
country began, and New York audiences would not go to hear singers who
had not already made European reputations. But Mr. Conried succeeded in
producing many works new to the American public. Of these "Parsifal"
stands forth conspicuously, though he found a competitor in Henry W.
Savage, who produced "Parsifal" in English a few days in advance of Mr.
Conried's production. This was followed in 1906 by Strauss's "Salome."
Conried died in 1908 and was succeeded by the dual control of Signor
Gatti-Casazza and Andreas Dippel, but Dippel soon resigned and went to
Chicago, and from that date until the present (1922) Signor
Gatti-Casazza has been sole manager of the Metropolitan Opera House.

In 1906 Oscar Hammerstein opened the Manhattan Opera House in New York
City and instituted a strong rivalry with the Metropolitan. He brought
to America some excellent singers and presented many works new to the
American public. While the Metropolitan company gave more German than
French or Italian opera, the Manhattan seemed to tend towards a
preponderance of French opera. The rivalry was beneficial to the public
if not to the stockholders.

We find during this period an opera, "The Pipe of Desire," by Frederick
S. Converse, the first American opera to be presented at the
Metropolitan Opera House. All the principals, with one exception, were
also of American birth,--Louise Homer, Riccardo Martin, Clarence
Whitehill and Herbert Witherspoon. The other principal was Lenora
Sparks, an English singer.

The most notable feature of the decade seems to have been the spread of
musical enterprise throughout the country. Distant cities were
organizing choral societies and orchestras to a greater extent than ever
before. It is necessary not only to develop composers, support a few
fine orchestras and produce a few operas, but the nation must grow
musically as a whole. The support given to musical enterprise depends on
the education of the rising generation, and must begin with the schools.

  1900. Jan. 5. Sinding's "Rondo Infinito" given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra. Also Weidig's "Scherzo Capriccioso."

  1900. Jan. 13. R. Goldmark's overture to "Hiawatha" produced (from
    MS.) by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Jan. 19. Sinding's "Episodes Chevaleresques" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Jan. 22. Spinelli's opera "A Basso Porto" presented by the
    Castle Square Opera Company in New York City.

  1900. Jan. 24. American debut of Fritz Friedrichs, as _Beckmesser_
    in "Die Meistersinger" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York
    City.

  1900. Jan. 25. Reyer's opera "Salammbo" presented at the French
    Opera House, New Orleans.

  1900. Feb. 3. G. W. Chadwick's "Elegiac Overture" produced (from
    MS.) by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Feb. 10. V. d'Indy's suite for orchestra "Medee" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Feb. 11. E. Pessard's "Danses Espagnoles," and Dubois's
    "Marche des Batteurs" from the opera "Xaviere," given at a
    concert of the Orchestral Club, in Boston.

  1900. Feb. 17. C. Franck's symphonic poem "Les Eolides" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Mar. 10. R. Strauss's symphonic poem "Ein Heldenleben" given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Mar. 10. Sinding's Violin Concerto in A major given by the
    Philharmonic Society in New York City, with Henri Marteau as
    soloist. Also Guiraud's "Caprice" for violin.

  1900. Mar. 10. J. K. Paine's ballet music from his opera "Azara"
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Mar. 14. The overture to Coleridge Taylor's "The Song of
    Hiawatha" given at a concert of the Cecilia Society, Boston.

  1900. Mar. 25. C. Franck's symphonic poem, with chorus, "The
    Beatitudes," given by the German Liederkranz, in New York City.

  1900. April 7. Mrs. H. H. A. Beach's pianoforte concerto in C
    sharp minor produced (from MS.) by the Boston symphony
    Orchestra; also Rameau's "Ballet Suite" given for the first time
    in America.

  1900. April 27. The Overture to Saint-Saens's opera "La Princesse
    Jaune"; Becker's "Scenes Luxembourgeoises"; Dubois's "Rigaudon"
    and "Danses Cenenoles," and E. Tavan's "Noce Arabe" given by
    the Orchestral Club, Boston.

  1900. July 2 Production of Frank von der Stucken's symphonic
    festival prologue, "Pax, Triumphans," at a Saengerfest in
    Brooklyn, N. Y.

  1900. Oct. Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra established by the
    Orchestral Association, with Fritz Scheel as conductor.

  1900. Oct. 19. Chaikovsky's suite de ballet "La Belle au Bois
    Dormant" and G. Schumann's "Symphonic Variations" for organ and
    orchestra given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra; also d'Indy's
    "Wallenstein's Camp."

  1900. Oct. 20. Handel's Fourth Concerto for Organ (B minor) given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Oct. 20. Edouard Strauss and his Vienna Orchestra made
    American debut at the Waldorf Astoria, New York City. Made an
    extensive tour of the United States.

  1900. Nov. 2. Berlioz's overture to "Rob Roy" given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Nov. 12. American debut of Charles Gilibert (baritone) in
    "Romeo et Juliette" in San Francisco, Cal. His New York debut
    took place at the Metropolitan Opera House on Dec. 18, in the
    same opera, as the _Duke of Verona_.

  1900. Nov. 17. American debut of Ossip Gabrilowitsch, Russian
    pianist, at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1900. Nov. 13. American debut of Robert Blass (tenor), as _Herman_
    in "Tannhaeuser," in San Francisco, Cal. New York debut Dec. 24.

  1900. Nov. 14. American debut of Louise Homer (contralto) as
    _Amneris_ in "Aida," and Imbart de la Tour (tenor) as
    _Rhadames_, at San Francisco, Cal. New York debut same opera,
    Metropolitan Opera House, Dec. 22.

  1900. Nov. 16. Josef Suk's symphony in E major given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1900. Nov. 17. American debut of Marcel Journet (baritone) in
    "Lucia" at San Francisco, Cal.

  1900. Nov. 19. American debut of Fritzi Scheff (lyric soprano) as
    _Mimi_ in "La Boheme" at San Francisco, Cal. New York debut as
    _Fidelio_, Metropolitan Opera House, Dec. 29.

  1900. Nov. 19. Goring Thomas's opera "Esmeralda" given by the
    Metropolitan English Grand Opera Company at the Metropolitan
    Opera House, New York City.

  1900. Nov. 24. F. Cowen's sixth symphony "Idyllic" (F major) given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Nov. 30. Henri Rabaud's symphonic poem, "La Procession
    Nocturne" played by the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, Frank van
    der Stucken conducting.

  1890. April 23. Brahms's First Pianoforte Concerto given at
    Steinway Hall, New York, by Conrad Ansorge, assisted by part of
    the Th. Thomas Orchestra.

  1900. Dec. 1. Tanaief's symphony in C, with Harold Bauer (debut) as
    soloist, given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Dec. 2. Scriabin's "Reverie" given by the Cincinnati
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Dec. 5. Coleridge Taylor's cantata "Hiawatha's Departure"
    given by the Cecilia Society in Boston.

  1900. Dec. 8. Smetana's fourth symphonic poem "Ma Vlast" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Dec. 10. F. X. Arens's "Salve Regina" given by the Musical
    Arts Society, in New York City.

  1900. Dec. 22. F. S. Converse's "Festival of Pan" produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1900. Dec. Bach's B minor Mass given by the Bach Choir at
    Bethlehem, Pa., at one of the Bach Festivals which were
    inaugurated this year.

  1901. Jan. Death of Edmund C. Stanton, manager of the Metropolitan
    Opera House, New York City, from 1884 to 1891.

  1901. Jan. 11. Rimsky-Korsakof's "Fantaisie de Concert" for violin
    given by the Philharmonic Society in New York City with Maud
    Powell as soloist.

  1901. Jan. 14. New York debut of Margaret McIntyre, soprano, as
    _Marguerite_ in Boito's opera "Mefistofele" at the Metropolitan
    Opera House.

  1901. Jan. 16. New York debut of Lucienne Breval, noted French
    soprano, in Massenet's opera "Le Cid," at the Metropolitan Opera
    House.

  1901. Jan. 18. Victor Herbert's symphonic poem "Hero and Leander"
    produced by the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra, conducted by the
    composer.

  1901. Jan. 23. Luigini's "La Voix des Cloches" given at a concert
    of the Orchestral Club in Boston.

  1901. Jan. 27. H. R. Shelley's overture "Santa Claus" given at a
    concert in the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, under
    Walter Damrosch.

  1901. Jan. 29. C. M. Loeffler's "Divertissement Espagnol" for
    saxophone and orchestra (written for Mrs. Richard J. Hall)
    produced at a concert of the Orchestral Club in Boston, with
    Mrs. Hall as soloist.

  1901. Feb. 2. I. Bruell's overture to "Macbeth" (Op. 46), and van
    der Stucken's symphonic prologue to "William Ratcliffe," given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1901. Feb. 4. Puccini's opera "La Tosca" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Milka Ternina as
    _La Tosca_, Cremonini as _Cavaradossi_, Scotti as _Scarpia_,
    Gilibert as the _Sacristan_, and Mancinelli conducting.

  1901. Mar. 1. Philharmonic Orchestra of Leipzig visiting America,
    gave its first concert in New York City, Hans Winderstein,
    conductor.

  1901. Mar. 9. Bruckner's Third Symphony (D minor) given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1901. Mar. 15. Elgar's overtures "Cockaigne," also Glazunof's
    "Ruses d'Amor," given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1901. Mar. 30. Schumann's overture "Julius Caesar" (Op. 128),
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1901. April 6. H. Brockway's "Sylvan Suite" for orchestra produced
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1901. April 13. F. Weingaertner's symphony in G major, given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1901. April 20. Gustav Strube's Rhapsody for Orchestra (Op. 17)
    produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1901. Sept. 26. G. W. Chadwick's oratorio "Judith" produced at the
    Worcester (Mass.) Festival.

  1901. Sept. 27. Mackenzie's orchestral suite "Coriolanus" given at
    the Worcester (Mass.) Festival.

  1901, Oct. 14. Eugen d'Albert's overture "Der Improvisatore" given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1901. Nov. 15, Dvo[vr]ak's overture "Mein Heim," given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1901. Nov. 16. S. von Hausegger's symphony "Barbarossa" given by
    the Symphony Society in New York City.

  1901. Nov. 22. J. Suk's "Pohadka" given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1901 Dec. 2. American debut of Jan Kubelik, violinist, at a
    concert in Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1901. Dec. 6. Production of Victor Herbert's "Woodland Fancies,"
    orchestral suite, by the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra,
    conducted by the composer.

  1901. Dec. 7. Glazunof's "Ouverture Solennelle" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra, also Sibelius's "Two Legends" from
    "Kalevala."

  1901. Dec. 20. Production of Henry K. Hadley's symphony "The Four
    Seasons" by the Philharmonic Society in New York City. This work
    won the New England Conservatory and Paderewski prizes. Was
    played in Chicago Jan. 24, 1902, and Pittsburgh, Nov. 27, 1903.

  1901. Dec. 28. Bruckner's Fifth Symphony (D flat major), and
    Bach's concerto for trumpet, flute, oboe, and violin, in F
    major, given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1901. Century Musical Club formed in Atlanta, Ga.

  1901. F. van der Stucken resigned conductorship of the Cincinnati
    Symphony Orchestra and was succeeded by L. Stokowski.

  1902. Jan. 3. Production, by the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra, of
    Fritz Stahlberg's suite, "Die Brautschau."

  1902. Jan. 3. Elgar's "Variations" for orchestra given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Jan. 7. Chauvet's suite "Feuillets d'Album" (orchestrated by
    Henri Marechal); the introduction to the first act of d'Indy's
    music drama "Fervaal"; and Enesco's symphonic suite "Poeme
    Roumain" given at a concert of the Orchestral Club in Boston.

  1902. Jan. 10. Production of R. Burmeister's dramatic tone poem
    "The Sisters" by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1902. Jan. 11. Liszt's "Toedten-Tanz," for pianoforte and
    orchestra, given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Jan. 22. Isidore de Lara's opera "Messaline" presented at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Emma Calve,
    Alvarez and Scotti. Flon conducting.

  1902. Jan. 25. Orchestral suite from Glazunof's ballet "Raymonda"
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Jan. 31. Sibelius's symphonic poem "Journeys Homewards"
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1902. Feb. 9. Gounod's lamentation "Gallia" (1871) given by the
    Handel and Haydn Society in Boston.

  1902. Feb. 14. Paderewski's opera "Manru" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Marcella Sembrich,
    Louise Homer, David Bispham, and Bandrowski.

  1902. Feb. 14. The love scene from R. Strauss's opera "Feuernot"
    given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Feb. 28. C. M. Loeffler's "By the Waters of Babylon," for
    women's voices with harp, two flutes, cello, and organ, given by
    the Choral Art Society, Boston.

  1902. Mar. 1. Schilling's symphonic prologue to "Oedipus Rex"
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Mar. 14. H. K. Hadley's "Suite Orientale" produced by the
    Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Mar. 15. H. Koessler's "Symphonic Variations" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Mar. 27. Bridge's cantata "The Forging of the Anchor" given
    at the Baptist Temple, Brooklyn, N. Y., under the direction of
    E. M. Bowman.

  1902. April 1. Rabaud's "Fantaisie sur des Chansons Russes";
    Mozart's adagio and minuet from the second "Divertissement"; and
    Debussy's prelude to "L'Apresmidi d'un Faune," given by the
    Orchestral Club, Boston.

  1902. April 5. D'Indy's Second Symphony (B flat major) given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra, with Harold Bauer as soloist.

  1902. April 8. Massenet's cantata "The Promised Land" given by the
    Cecilia Society, Boston.

  1902. April 12, Production (from MS.) of C. M. Loeffler's two
    poems for orchestra, "Lebonne Chanson" and "Villanelle au
    Diable," by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Oct. 8. Mascagni's opera "Zanetto" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, by a special company
    conducted by the composer.

  1902. Oct 16. Mascagni's opera "Iris" given at the Metropolitan
    Opera House, New York City, by a special company conducted by
    the composer.

  1902. Oct. 25. H. Huber's Second Symphony (E minor) given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Oct. 28. F. Cowen's overture "The Butterfly's Ball" given by
    the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, and on the 31st Saint-Saens's
    overture "Les Barbares."

  1902. Nov. 4. Jaernefelt's symphonic poem "Korsholm" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Nov. 14. Boellman's "Variations Symphoniques," and
    Sibelius's suite "King Christian II," given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Nov. 15. Caetani's "Symphonic Prelude in A minor" given by
    the Philharmonic Society, in New York City.

  1902. Nov. 15. Rimsky-Korsakof's overture "To the Betrothed of the
    Tsar" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Nov. 19. American debut of Elsa Ruegger, cellist, at a
    Wetzler concert in Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1902. Nov. 22. American debut of J. Kocian, violinist, at a
    concert given by Walter Damrosch in Carnegie Hall, New York
    City.

  1902. Nov. 28. Widor's Chorale and Variations for harp and
    orchestra given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra; also Elgar's
    military marches, "Pomp" and "Circumstance."

  1902. Dec. 2. Production of Georg Henschel's "Requiem" by the
    Cecilia Society, Boston, conducted by the composer.

  1902. Dec. 5. F. Weingaertner's Second Symphony (in E flat) given
    by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1902. Dec. 6. Bach's Concerto in A minor for violin and
    orchestra, and Berlioz's overture "Les Francs Juges" was given
    in 1846, in New York.

  1902. Dec. 19. American debut of Madame Kirkby-Lunn, contralto, as
    _Brangaene_ in "Tristan und Isolde" at the Metropolitan Opera
    House, New York City.

  1902. Dec. 23. Massenet's opera "Cendrillon" presented at the
    French Opera House, New Orleans.

  1902. Dec. 27. H. W. Parker's Concerto in E flat for organ and
    orchestra produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1902. Heinrich Conried became manager of the Metropolitan Opera
    House, and Alfred Herz appeared as conductor.

  1902. Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra established in Minneapolis,
    Minn.

  1903. Jan. 2. Production of Victor Herbert's orchestral suite
    "Columbus," by the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Jan. 2. Urspruch's overture "Der Sturm" given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Jan. 5. D'Indy's "Fantasia on French Folk Themes," given by
    the Longy Club at Chickering Hall, Boston.

  1903. Jan. 7. Chevillard's "Le Chene et le Roseau," G. Longy's
    "Impression" for saxophone (dedicated to Mrs. R. J. Hall),
    d'Ambrosio's "Quatre Pieces d'Orchestre," and Jan Blockx's
    "Danse Flamande" given by the Orchestral Club, Boston.

  1903. Jan. 23. Volbach's "Es waren zwei Koenigskinder" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Jan. 24. Arensky's Introduction to the opera "Nala and
    Damayanti" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Jan. 25. Production of G. Strube's "Hymn to Eros" at a
    concert given in Boston, for the Germanic Museum.

  1903. Jan. 27. C. W. von Gluck's Symphony in A major (probably not
    previously heard in America) given by Sam Franko's orchestra in
    New York City.

  1903. Jan. 30. Ritter's "Symphonic Waltz," and Wagner's
    "Coronation March" given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Jan. 31. Fibich's overture in F major to Vrehlicky's comedy
    "A Night on Karlstein," and Mackenzie's suite for violin and
    orchestra, "Pibroch," given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Feb. 5. L. von Gaertner's tone poem "Macbeth" given by the
    Wetzler orchestra in Carnegie Hall, New York City. Also Hugo
    Heermann, noted violinist, made his American debut, playing the
    Beethoven Violin Concerto.

  1903. Feb. 7. Hugo Kaun's symphonic poems, "Minnehaha" and
    "Hiawatha" given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Feb. 7. Sibelius's symphonic poem "The Swan of Tuenela"
    given by the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Feb. 8. Dubois's oratorio "Paradise Lost" given by the
    Handel and Haydn Society in Boston.

  1903. Feb. 13. Coleridge Taylor's Ballad in D minor given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Mar. 14. Production of F. Stahlberg's tone poem "To the
    Memory of Abraham Lincoln" by the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Mar. 14. G. Schumann's overture "The Dawn of Love" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Mar. 23. Elgar's cantata "The Dream of Gerontius" given by
    the Apollo Musical Club, Chicago. H. M. Wild conductor.

  1903. April 4. G. M. Witkowski's Symphony in D minor given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. April 11. F. S. Converse's symphonic poem "Endymion's
    Narrative" produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. April 15. The "Marche Funebre" from the last scene of
    Berlioz's "Hamlet" given by the Orchestral Club, Boston.

  1903. April 18. R. Strauss's "Burleske" in D minor for pianoforte
    and orchestra, given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Oct. 17. The "Entr'acte Symphonique" from Bruneau's opera
    "Messidor" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Oct. 24. Variations on a Russian Theme, by six Russian
    composers, given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Oct. 24. E. F. Arbos's morceau de concert "Tango," and
    Glazunof's "Fourth Symphony" (E flat) given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Oct. 30. American debut of Jacques Thibaud, French
    violinist, at a Wetzler concert in Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1903. Oct. 31. V. d'Indy's symphonic introduction to "L'Etranger"
    given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Oct. Symphony Society of New York City, reorganized with
    Walter Damrosch as conductor.

  1903. Nov. 7. Bruneau's symphonic poem "La Belle aux Bois Dormant"
    also Elgar's incidental music for "Granis and Diarmid" given by
    the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Nov. 20 Glazunof's Seventh Symphony given by the Pittsburgh
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Nov. 23. American debut of Enrico Caruso, noted Italian
    tenor, as the _Duke_ in "Rigoletto" at the Metropolitan Opera
    House, New York City.

  1903. Nov. 25. American operatic debut of Olive Fremstad as
    _Sieglinde_ at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City. She
    had appeared in concert in 1892, but had gone abroad and now
    appeared as an operatic artist.

  1903. Nov. 27. Frank Guerney Cauffman's tone poem "Salammbo" given
    by the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Nov. 28. E. Dohnanyi's Symphony in D minor given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1903, Nov. 30. Carl Busch's cantata "King Olaf" produced by the
    Apollo Musical Club of Chicago. H. M. Wild, conductor.

  1903. Dec. 8. Bruno Oscar Klein's Suite for violoncello and
    orchestra, in F, given by the Philharmonic Society, New York
    City.

  1903. Dec. 10. Debussy's lyric poem "La Demoiselle Elue" given at
    a concert of the pupils of Madame Salisbury, in Boston, with
    Helen Allen Hunt as soloist, and Heinrich Gebhardt, pianist. A
    full performance with orchestra was given by the Cecilia Society
    April 4, 1905, when Isabelle Bouton and Bertha Cushing Child
    were soloists.

  1903. Dec. 18. Cowen's "Indian Rhapsody" given by the Pittsburgh
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Dec. 24. First performance in German, outside of Bayreuth,
    of Wagner's "Parsifal" given by the Metropolitan Opera Company,
    New York City, under Heinrich Conried, with Milka Ternina as
    _Kundry_; Alois Burgstaller as _Parsifal_; Anton Van Rooy as
    _Amfortas_; Robert Blass as _Gurnemanz_; Marcel Journet as
    _Titurel_; Otto Goritz as _Klingsor_, and Alfred Hertz
    conductor.

  1903. Dec. 26. G. Schumann's "Variationen und Doppelfuge" given by
    the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1903. Dec. Edythe Walker, contralto, made her American debut at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, in "Aida."

  1903-4. Guest conductors of the Philharmonic Society of New York
    City:

        Edouard Colonne     of Paris, France
        Gustav F. Kogel     "  Frankfort am Main, Germany
        Henry J. Wood       "  London, England
        Victor Herbert      "  Pittsburgh, Pa.
        Felix Weingartner   "  Munich, Bavaria
        Vasili Safonof      "  Moscow, Russia
        Richard Strauss     "  Berlin, Germany

  1904. Jan. 1. Lemare's "Rhapsody and Caprice Orientale" given by
    the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Jan. 2. Sibelius's Second Symphony (D major) given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Jan. 5. Moussorgsky's fantaisie for orchestra,[1] "Une Nuit
    sur le Mont Chauve"; V. d'Indy's "Choral Varie" for saxophone
    (dedicated to Mrs. R. J. Hall), Mrs. Hall soloist: Rabaud's
    eclogue "Poeme Virgilien"; and Augusta Holmes's symphonic poem
    "Irlande," given by the Orchestral Club in Boston, G. Longy,
    conductor.

  1904. Jan. 8. F. Stahlberg's Suite (Opus 10) produced by the
    Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Jan. 12. American debut of Pablo Casals, noted
    violoncellist, at a concert given by Sam Franko in the New
    Lyceum, New York City.

  1904. Jan. 23. Glazunof's suite "Moyen Age" given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Jan. 23. Schumann's suite for orchestra "In Carnival Time"
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Jan. 28. First concert of the Russian Symphony Orchestra,
    organized by Modest Altschuler, in Cooper Union Hall, New York
    City. Rachmaninof's "The Cliff" was played for the first time in
    America.

  1904. Feb. 6. Dubois's overture "Frithjof" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Feb. 9. Elgar's oratorio "The Apostles" given by the
    Oratorio Society, New York City.

  1904. Feb. 10. Debussy's three nocturnes, "Images," "Fetes," and
    "Sirens," given at a Chickering production concert in Boston, B.
    J. Lang conducting.

  1904. Feb 11. Ippolitof-Ivanof's "Caucasian Sketches" given by the
    Russian Symphony Orchestra, New York City.

  1904. Feb. 20. Bruckner's Ninth Symphony (unfinished) given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Feb. 26. Frederick Stock's "Symphonic Variations" given by
    the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Feb. 27. Th. Akimenko's "Lyric Poem" for orchestra given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Mar. 3. Arensky's "Variations on an Original Theme," and
    Tanaief's "First Symphony," given by the Russian Symphony
    Orchestra at the Cooper Union, New York City.

  1904. Mar. 12. G. Strube's "Fantastic Overture" produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Mar. 21. Richard Strauss's "Symphonia Domestica" given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City, conducted by the
    composer.

  1904.  Mar. 23. Glazunof's symphonic poem "Stenka Razin" given
    at a Chickering concert in Boston under B. J. Lang.

  1904. April 9. Glazunof's overture "Carneval" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. April 11. Widor's "Ouverture Espagnol," Rameau's opera
    ballet "Les Indes Galantes," and Ten Brink's "Premiere Suite
    d'Orchestre," given by the Orchestral Club in Boston.

  1904. April 16. Madame Helen Hopekirk's Concert Piece in D minor
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, with Madame Hopekirk as
    soloist.

  1904. April 17. Gleason's symphonic poem "Edris" produced by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. April 23. Hugo Wolf's symphonic poem "Penthesilea" given by
    the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. April 23. Chadwick's concert overture "Euterpe" produced by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. April 30. Sibelius's tone poem "Eine Saga" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Production of Leo Schulz's "American Festival Overture" at
    the St. Louis Exposition.

  1904. Oct. A Symphony Orchestra formed in New York City by Arnold
    Volpe.

  1899. Jan. 13. P. Dukas's scherzo "The Sorcerer's Apprentice"
    given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Nov. 5. Elgar's overture "In the South" given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Nov. 6. Mahler's Fourth Symphony given by the Symphony
    Society, New York City.

  1904. Nov. 11. E. Boehe's "Wanderings of Odysseus" given by the
    Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra, also Max Schilling's tone poem
    "The Witch Song."

  1904. Nov. 18. Chausson's "Poeme" for solo violin with orchestra,
    given by the Symphony Society in New York City. (It was played
    in Boston April 25 by Miss Jessie Davis, piano, and Hugh Codman,
    violin).

  1904. Nov. 19. Rimsky-Korsakof's third act of the ballet "Mlada,"
    and Rachmaninof's dances from "Aleko" given by the Russian
    Symphony Orchestra, New York City.

  1904. Nov. 26. Saint-Saens's First Symphony (E flat major) and
    Massenet's "Hungarian Scenes" given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1904. Dec. 3. Carl Goldmark's overture "In Italy" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Dec. 3. Bach's Second Violin Concerto (in E major) given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Dec. 17. Rachmaninof's Pianoforte Concerto in F sharp minor
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. Dec. 24. Chaikovsky's symphonic description of "The Battle
    of Poltava," and the hopak from "Mazeppa," also Glazunof's
    symphonic poem "Stenka Razin," and Rimsky-Korsakof's overture
    "May Night" given by the Russian Symphony Orchestra, in New York
    City.

  1904. Dec. 31. D'Indy's Symphony in B flat major (Op. 57) given by
    the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1904. The Chicago Orchestra permanently endowed and Orchestra Hall
    built.

  1904. American debut of Luisa Tetrazzini took place at the Tivoli,
    in San Francisco, Cal.

  1904. Coleridge Taylor visited America as the guest of the
    Coleridge Taylor Society of Washington, D. C.

  1904. Emil Paur appointed conductor of the Pittsburgh Symphony
    Orchestra (1904-1910).

  1904-5. Johann Strauss's opera "Die Zigeunerbaron" given at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City. This was produced in
    English at the Casino Feb. 15, 1886.

  1904-5. Guest conductors of the Philharmonic Society, New York
    City, for this season were:

        Frederic H. Cowen  of London, England
        Arthur Nikisch     of Vienna, Austria
        E. Schuch          of Dresden, Germany
        B. Glazunof        of St. Petersburg, Russia
        C. V. Stanford     of London, England
        E. Colonne         of Paris, France
        Sir E. Elgar       of Malvern, England

  1905. Jan. 4. E. Chabrier's "Danse Slave" from the opera "Le Roi
    Malgre Lui"; A. Georges's "Prelude d'Axel"; H. Sitt's "Andante"
    for violin and orchestra; G. Sparck's symphonic poem, "Boabdil";
    C. Forsyth's "Concerto in G minor" (first movement); Erik
    Satie's "Gymnopedies" numbers 1 and 2, orchestrated by C.
    Debussy; and J. Bordier's "Meditation on the seventh prelude of
    Bach," given by the Orchestral Club in Boston.

  1905. Jan. 20. Simandl's concert piece for double-bass and
    orchestra given by the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Jan. 20. Elgar's concert overture "Froissart" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Jan. 21. Rimsky-Korsakof's suite "Tsar-Saltan" given by the
    Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1905. Jan. 21. Hugo Wolf's "Italian Serenade" given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Jan. 21. F. S. Converse's two poems "Night" and "Day" given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Feb. 3. Rimsky-Korsakof's Pianoforte Concerto in C sharp
    minor given by the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Feb. 4. Eugen d'Albert's Second Pianoforte Concerto (in E
    major) given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Feb. 8. Elgar's "Benedictus" given by the New York Oratorio
    Society.

  1905. Feb. 11. Bruch's Serenade in A minor for violin given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Feb. 25. Arensky's suite "Silhouettes," excerpts from
    Mussorgsky's opera "Khovanstchina," and Kalinnikof's "Symphony
    in A," given by the Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1905. Mar. 3. Converse's fantasia "The Mystic Trumpeter" produced
    by the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Mar. 25. Gustav Mahler's Fifth (Giant) Symphony given by the
    Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Mar. 25. Rimsky-Korsakof's musical picture "Sadko" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Mar. 30. Ysaye's "Poeme Elegiaque" for violin and orchestra
    given by the New York Symphony Society with Ysaye as soloist.

  1905. April 1. Chaikovsky's fantasia "Night" given by the Russian
    Symphony Orchestra in New York City. Also Rubinstein's "Romance
    et Caprice Russe."

  1905. April 4. Charpentier's symphonic drama "La Vie du Poete"
    given by the Cecilia Society in Boston.

  1905. April 14. R. Strauss's cantata "Taillefer" given by the
    Oratorio Society in New York City.

  1905. April 18. E. Chausson's "Hymn Vedique," and G. Huee's
    symphonic suite "Titania" given by the Orchestral Club in
    Boston.

  1905. April 22. Gustav Strube's symphonic poem "Longing" produced
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. April 29. G. Ropartz's "Fantasia in D minor" produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Sept. 29. G. W. Chadwick's symphonic poem "Cleopatra"
    produced at the Worcester (Mass) Festival.

  1905. Oct. 21. Smetana's overture "Libussa" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Oct. 27. Liadof's "Baba Yaga" given by the Philadelphia
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Nov. 18. Rimsky-Korsakof's suite "Snow Maiden" given by the
    Russian Symphony Orchestra, New York City. Also, Rachmaninof's
    "Second Pianoforte Concerto" (won Glinka Prize 1904) with Raoul
    Pugno as soloist.

  1905. Nov. 18. Busoni's "Comedy Overture" in C major given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Nov. 25. American debut of Madame Jeanne Jomelli, at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, as _Elizabeth_ in
    "Tannhaeuser."

  1905. Dec. 2. Cesar Franck's symphonic poem "Psyche and Cupid"
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Dec. 4. Magnard's "Chant Funebre" and Chausson's Symphony
    in B flat given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra in Philadelphia,
    with Vincent d'Indy as guest conductor.

  1905. Dec. 22. Production of Wassily Leps's Japanese reincarnation
    theme "Andon," for soprano, tenor, and orchestra, by the
    Philadelphia Symphony Society.

  1905. Dec. 23. Gustav Strube's Violin Concerto in F sharp minor
    produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. Dec. 24. Sibelius's symphonic poem "Finlandia" given at a
    concert at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with A.
    Vigna as conductor. It was played by the Russian Symphony
    Orchestra on Dec. 30.

  1905. Dec. 30. Zolotaref's "Rhapsodie Hebraique" given by the
    Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York City. Also Arensky's
    Violin Concerto (Op. 54), with Maud Powell as soloist.

  1905. Dec. 30. Webber's Symphony in C minor given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1905. The St. Paul (Minn.) Symphony Orchestra formed under Walter
    Rothwell.

  1905. Frederick Stock appointed conductor of the Chicago Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1905. The Institute of Musical Art established in New York City by
    Frank Damrosch.

  1905-6. The guest conductors of the New York Philharmonic Society
    this season were:

        Willem Mengelberg   of Amsterdam, Holland.
        Victor Herbert      of Pittsburgh, Pa.
        Max Fiedler         of Hamburg, Germany.
        Vasily Safonof      of Moscow, Russia.
        Ernst Kunwald       of Frankfort am Main, Germany.
        Fritz Steinbach     of Cologne, Germany.

  1906. Jan. 2. Guiraud's "Chasse Fantastique"; Faure's "Pavane";
    Massenet's "Pastorale Mystique," from the opera "Le Jongleur de
    Notre Dame"; Lalo's "Valse de Cigarette, Namouna"; Bruneau's
    "Preludes de l'Ouragan"; Sparck's "Legende," for saxophone and
    orchestra (production); Tiersot's "Danses Populaires
    Francaises," given by the Orchestral Club in Boston.

  1906. Jan. 9. First American appearance of Rudolph Ganz, noted
    pianist, with the Kneisel Quartet, in Boston.

  1906. Jan. 20. Chausson's Symphony in B flat major given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1906. Jan. 26. Tirindelli's symphonic poem "Tragi-Commedia" given
    by the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1906. Jan. 27. American debut of Josef Lhevinne, noted pianist, at
    a concert of the Russian Symphony Orchestra in Carnegie Hall,
    New York City.

  1906. Jan. 27. Glazunof's symphonic picture "The Kremlin" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1906. Jan. 31. Giordano's opera "Siberia" presented at the French
    Opera House, New Orleans, La.

  1906. Jan. 31. F. S. Converse's opera "The Pipe of Desire,"
    produced at Jordan Hall, Boston. (It was presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York, Mar. 18, 1908.)

  1906. Feb. 6. V. d'Indy's oratorio "St. Mary Magdalene" given by
    the Cecilia Society in Boston.

  1906. Feb. 11. J. Suk's Scherzo for Orchestra given by the New
    York Symphony Society.

  1906. Feb. 24. Konius's suite "Childhood" given by the Russian
    Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1906. Mar. 2. Adolf Weidig's symphonic fantaisie "Semiramis" given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1906. Mar. 3. F. Boehe's "First Four Episodes for Orchestra" given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1906. Mar. 3. Production of F. S. Converse's ballads for baritone
    and orchestra by the Boston Symphony Orchestra at Providence, R.
    I., with David Bispham as soloist.

  1906. Mar. 10. J. Dalcroze's "Violin Concerto in C minor" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1906. Mar. 10. Arthur Shepherd's "Ouverture Joyeuse" also H. F.
    Gilbert's "Salammbo's Invocation" given at a concert of the New
    Music Society in New York City, and at the same concert Ruth
    Deyo, pianist, made her debut.

  1906. Mar. 17. R. M. Gliere's First Symphony; Serof's "Cossack
    Dances"; Cesar Cui's "Waltz"; and Mlynarsky's "Violin Concerto,"
    given by the Russian Symphony Orchestra, New York City.

  1906. Mar. 31. Busoni's suite "Geharnischte" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1906. April 2. Production of H. H. Huss's Violin Concerto in D
    minor by the New Music Society in Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1906. April 7. Max Schilling's prelude to act III of "The Piper's
    Holiday" produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1906. April 17. Widor's "Les Pecheurs de Saint-Jean";
    Bourgault-Ducoudray's "Rhapsodie Cambodgienne"; A. Caplet's
    "Impression d'Automne" (Elegie for saxophone, written for and
    played by Mrs. R. J. Hall); M. Moszkowski's "Larghetto" and
    "Intermezzo," and R. Schumann's "Two Pieces in Canon Form"
    (orchestrated by Th. Dubois), given by the Orchestral Club in
    Boston.

  1906. April 21. First concert of the Chicago Musical Art Society,
    organized under Clarence Dickinson.

  1906. May 3. Production of W. H. Humiston's "Southern Fantasy" for
    orchestra, at the Mendelssohn Union, Orange, N. J.

  1906. Oct. 8. First appearance of the "La Scala" orchestra of
    Milan (Italy) at Carnegie Hall, New York City, with Leoncavallo
    as conductor.

  1906. Oct. 15. Production of F. S. Converse's incidental music to
    Percy Mackaye's play "Jeanne d'Arc," given by Sothern and Julia
    Marlowe in Philadelphia.

  1906. Oct. 15. Puccini's opera "Madame Butterfly" presented by the
    Henry Savage Opera Company (in English) at Washington, D. C.

  1906. Oct. Vassily Safonof appointed conductor of the Philharmonic
    Society, New York City.

  1906. Nov. 3. Saint-Saens's fantasia "Africa" for pianoforte and
    orchestra given by the Symphony Society in New York City with
    the composer as soloist.

  1906. Nov. 12. Puccini's opera "Madama Butterfly" given by the
    Savage Opera Company in Washington, D. C.

  1906. Nov. 15. Glazunof's "Scene Dansante" given by the Russian
    Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1906. Nov. 20. American debut of F. Constantino, tenor, also Fely
    Dereyne, Riccardo Martin, and A. Segurola, with the San Carlo
    Opera Company in New Orleans, La.

  1906. Nov. 26. American operatic debut of Geraldine Farrar,
    soprano, as _Juliette_ in Gounod's "Romeo et Juliette" at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1906. Nov. 27. Elgar's cantata "The Banner of St. George" given at
    a Musurgia Concert, at Carnegie Hall, New York City, with the
    assistance of one hundred members of the Brooklyn Oratorio
    Society.

  1906. Nov. 30. J. Sibelius's Violin Concerto in D minor given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City, with Maud Powell as
    soloist.

  1906. Dec. 3. American debut of Alessandro Bonci, Italian tenor,
    in "I Puritani," at the Manhattan Opera House, New York City.

  1906. Dec. 4. Pierne's oratorio "The Children's Crusade" given by
    the Oratorio Society, New York City.

  1906. Dec. 5. American debut of Maurice Renaud, great French
    baritone, as _Rigoletto_, at the Manhattan Opera House, New York
    City.

  1906. Dec. 5. Giordano's opera "Fedora" given at the Metropolitan
    Opera House, New York City, with Lina Cavalieri (debut), Caruso,
    Scotti. A. Vigna conducting.

  1906. Dec. 7. Debut of Donalda as _Marguerite_ in "Faust" at the
    Manhattan Opera House, New York City.

  1906. Dec. 15. Cesar Franck's morceau symphonique, "Redemption,"
    given by the New York Symphony Society.

  1906. Dec. 19. Debut of de Cisneros and Bassi in "Aida" at the
    Manhattan Opera House, New York City.

  1906. Dec. 20. Glazunof's Third Symphony; Rachmaninof's capriccio
    "Tzigane"; and Scriabin's Pianoforte Concerto with the composer
    as soloist, given by the Russian Symphony Orchestra, in New York
    City.

  1906-7. Oscar Hammerstein opened the Manhattan Opera House in New
    York City with a company including Melba, Gilibert-LeJeune,
    Mazarin Kate d'Arta, Farnetti, and Luisa Tetrazzini, soprani;
    Bressler-Gianoli, and Maria Gay, mezzi; Eleanora de Cisneros and
    Zacchari, contralti; A. Bonci, Bassi, Dalmores, Altchevski,
    tenori; M. Renaud, M. Sammarco, Ancona, Mendolfi, baritoni; E.
    de Reszke, Braz, and Maglinez, bassi.

  1906. The Philharmonic Society of New Orleans, La., organized.
    (Reorganized in 1917.)

  1906. St. Paul (Minn.) Symphony Orchestra organized with E. B.
    Emanuel as conductor. Walter H. Rothwell became conductor in
    1908.

  1907. Jan. 5. Sibelius's First Symphony (E minor) given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Jan. 17. Sibelius's overture "Karelia" given by the Russian
    Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1907. Jan. 17. A. Oldberg's dramatic overture "Paolo and
    Francesca" produced by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Jan, 19. American debut of Katherine Goodson, English
    pianist, with the Boston Symphony Orchestra. She played Grieg's
    concerto in A minor.

  1907. Jan. 20. Production of Arthur Foote's "Four Character
    Pieces" by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Jan. 22. R. Strauss's opera "Salome" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City with Olive Fremstad, and
    C. Burrian in leading parts, and Alfred Hertz conducting.

  1907. Jan. 25. Paul Juon's fantasie "The Watchman's Song" (after
    Danish Folk Songs) given by the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Feb. 1. American debut of Mario Sammarco, noted baritone, in
    "Pagliacci" at the Manhattan Opera House, New York City.

  1907. Feb. 7. Sibelius's orchestral suite "Karelia" given by the
    Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1907. Feb. 7. Elgar's "Romance" for orchestra given by the
    Symphony Society in New York City.

  1907. Feb. 9. Tinel's three symphonic pictures from the entr'acte
    music to Corneille's "Polyeucte" given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1907. Feb. 26. Scriabin's First Symphony, and Ippolitof-Ivanof's
    Second "Caucasian Suite" for orchestra given by the Russian
    Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1907. Mar. 2. Debussy's orchestral sketches "La Mer" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Mar. 9. Bach's "Brandenburg Concerto" in C major, for three
    violins, three celli, and three basses, given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Mar. 14. Scriabin's third symphony "The Divine Poem," and
    Davidof's "Violoncello Concerto" (Alwin Schroeder, soloist)
    given by the Russian Symphony Orchestra, in New York City.

  1907. Mar. 16. S. Noskowski's symphonic poem "The Steppe" (Op. 66)
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Mar. 19. American debut of Sir Edward Elgar as conductor of
    his oratorio, "The Apostles" with the Oratorio Society in New
    York City.

  1907. Mar. 26. Elgar's oratorio "The Kingdom" given by the
    Oratorio Society, New York City.

  1907. Mar. 27. Pietro Floridia's Symphony in D minor given by the
    Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Mar. 30. O. Fried's Prelude and Double Fugue for Strings,
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Mar. 31. Handel's oratorio "Belshazzar" given by the Handel
    and Haydn Society in Boston, with Madame Kileski-Bradbury,
    Misses Bouton, Kellogg, Mr. George Hamlin, and Mr. Watkin Mills
    as soloists.

  1907. April 1. X. Scharwenka's opera "Mataswintha" presented at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1907. April 3. Dr. P. Hartmann's oratorio "St. Peter" produced at
    Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1907. April 6. Howard Brockway's Symphony in D major produced by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. April 9. J. K. Paine's opera "Azara" presented, in concert
    form, by the Cecilia Society in Boston.

  1907. April 13. Reger's "Serenade" (Op. 59) given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra; also production of Henry K. Hadley's tone
    poem "Salome."

  1907. April 27. Victor Bendix's Fourth Symphony (D minor) given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Oct. 2. F. S. Converse's dramatic poem "Job" produced at the
    Worcester (Mass.) Festival.

  1907. Oct. 4. A. Hinton's Second Pianoforte Concerto.

  1907. Oct. 18. V. d'Indy's symphonic poem "Jour d'ete a la
    Montagne" given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Nov. 1. F. Stock's "Symphonic Waltz" given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Nov. 4. American debut of Jeanne Gerville-Reache, French
    contralto, as the _Blind Mother_ in "La Gioconda" at the
    Manhattan Opera House, New York City.

  1907. Nov. 14. Glazunof's Eighth Symphony (E flat) given by the
    Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1907. Nov. 16. The overture to Pfitzner's Christmas play "The
    Little Christ Elf" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Nov. 17. Edward German's "Welsh Rhapsody" given by the
    Symphony Society in New York City, conducted by the composer.

  1907. Nov. 18. Francesco Cilea's opera "Adrienne Lecouvreur"
    presented at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with
    Cavalieri, Caruso and Scotti in the leading parts.

  1907. Nov. 20. American debut of the Russian basso Chaliapin in
    "Mefistofele" at the Manhattan Opera House, New York City.

  1907. Nov. 23. C. M. Loeffler's symphonic poem "A Pagan Poem"
    produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra. Also Reznicek's
    adagio, scherzo and finale from "Symphonic Suite in E minor,"
    given for the first time in America.

  1907. Nov. 30. E. Boche's symphonic poem "Taormina" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Dec. 1. Dr. L. Damrosch's "Silver Wedding" produced by the
    Symphony Society, New York City.

  1907. Dec. 4. Wolf-Ferrari's oratorio "Vita Nuova" given by the
    Oratorio Society, New York City.

  1907. Dec. 7. Liapunof's Pianoforte Concerto given by the New York
    Symphony Society with Josef Hoffman as soloist.

  1907. Dec. 12. Ilyinsky's suite "Mir und Antra," and Arensky's
    "First Symphony," given by the Russian Symphony Orchestra in New
    York City.

  1907. Dec. 20. Max Reger's "Variations and Fugue" (Op. 100) given
    by the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. Dec. 21. D'Ambrosio's Violin Concerto in B minor, with R.
    Czerwonski as soloist; the "Goldonian Intermezzo" from Bossi's
    "Suite Variee," and Humperdinck's overture to "The Forced
    Marriage," given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1907. First Beethoven Festival given by the Symphony Society, New
    York City.

        Carl Pohlig appointed conductor of the Philadelphia Symphony
      Orchestra (1907-1912).

  1907. Max Zach appointed conductor of the St. Louis Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1908. Jan. 1. American debut of Gustav Mahler as conductor of a
    performance of "Tristan und Isolde" at the Metropolitan Opera
    House, New York City.

  1908. Jan. 3. Charpentier's opera "Louise" presented at the
    Manhattan Opera House, New York City, with Mary Garden in
    leading part, Campanini conducting.

  1908. Jan. 14. H. Bischoff's Symphony in E major given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Jan. 15. New York debut of Luisa Tetrazzini, great soprano,
    in "La Traviata" at the Manhattan Opera House. (She had
    previously been heard in San Francisco.)

  1908. Jan. 15. Beethoven's "Twelve Dances" given under Sam Franko
    at Mendelssohn Hall, New York City.

  1908. Jan. 16. Sibelius's Third Symphony (C major) given by the
    Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1908. Jan. 18. Mozart's "Three German Dances" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Jan. 21. Henri Rabaud's Second Symphony (E minor); E.
    Chausson's "Poeme de l'Amour et de la Mer" for voice and
    orchestra, (1) "La Fleur des Faux," "Interlude," (2) "La Mort de
    l'Amour"; and Balakiref's symphonic poem "En Boheme" given at an
    orchestral concert in Boston by Mrs. Richard J. Hall.

  1908. Jan. 25. Schelling's "Fantastic Suite" for pianoforte and
    orchestra given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Jan. 29. Dohnanyi's Violoncello Concerto in D given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra in Indianapolis, Ind., with H. Warnke
    as soloist.

  1908. Feb. 2. Chaikovsky's opera "Eugen Onegin" given in concert
    form by the Symphony Society in New York City.

  1908. Feb. 13. The scene "Winter" from Glazunof's ballet, "The
    Seasons," given by the Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York
    City.

  1908. Feb. 14. Richard Wagner's "Columbus" overture given by the
    Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Feb. 15. Rimsky-Korsakof's "Caprice on Spanish Themes"; and
    Schjelderup's "Sunrise on the Himalayas" from the stage music to
    Gjellerup's "Opferfeuer"; also Schjelderup's symphonic poem "A
    Summer Night on the Fjord" given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1908. Feb. 19. Debussy's opera "Pelleas et Melisande" presented at
    the Manhattan Opera House, New York City, with Mary Garden,
    Jeanne Gerville-Reache, and Perier in the cast. Campanini
    conducting.

  1908. Feb. 22. Production of Chadwick's "Symphonic Sketches" by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Feb. 28. Josef Hofmann's Third Pianoforte Concerto given by
    the Philharmonic Society in New York City.

  1908. Feb. 29. E. Dohnanyi's Concert Piece in D major given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Mar. 4. American debut of Madame Berta Morena as _Sieglinde_
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1908. Mar. 14. Balakiref's Symphony in C major given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Mar. 26. Stahlberg's symphonic suite "Ueber's Weltenmeer"
    given by the Volpe Orchestra in New York City.

  1908. Mar. 28. Gustav Strube's "Fantastic Dance," for orchestra,
    produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. April 7. M. Reger's "Unaccompanied Violin Sonata" given in
    New York City by Dora Valesca Becker.

  1908. April 11. C. P. E. Bach's Second Symphony, in E Flat, given,
    and H. K. Hadley's Third Symphony (B minor) produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. April 18. E. Moor's Pianoforte Concerto (Op. 57) and Ertel's
    symphonic poem "The Midnight Review" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. June. Production of H. W. Parker's "Ballade" for chorus and
    orchestra, by the Litchfield County Choral Union at Norfolk,
    Conn. Conducted by the composer.

  1908. Sept. 16. New building of the Academy of Music in Brooklyn,
    N. Y., opened.

  1908. Sept. 25. American debut of Blanche Arral in San Francisco,
    Cal., under the management of M. Grau.

  1908. Oct. 17. E. Sauer's First Pianoforte Concerto (E minor)
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra with the composer as
    soloist.

  1908. Oct. 24. MacDowell's third symphonic poem "Lamia" (Op. 29)
    produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Oct. 31. Chaikovsky's "Variations on a Rococo Theme" for
    cello and orchestra, given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Nov. 7. Debut of Albert Spalding, violinist, with the New
    York Symphony Society.

  1908. Nov. 9. American debut of Maria Labia in "Tosca" at the
    Manhattan Opera House, New York City.

  1908. Nov. 14. Gretry's three dances from "Cephale et Procris"
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Nov. 14. American debut of Dr. Ludwig Wuellner, lieder
    singer, at Mendelssohn Hall, New York City.

  1908. Nov. 16. American debut of Emmy Destinn as _Aida_ at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, on which occasion A.
    Toscanini made his first appearance as conductor.

  1908. Nov. 21. Sibelius's symphonic poem "A Spring Day" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Nov. 23. Eugen d'Albert's opera "Tiefland" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1908. Nov. 25. Massenet's opera "Thais" presented at the Manhattan
    Opera House, New York City, with Mary Garden (her American
    debut), Emma Trentini, J. Gerville-Reache, and Maurice Renaud.
    G. Campanini conducting.

  1908. Nov. 27. Massenet's opera "Le Jongleur de Notre Dame"
    presented at the Manhattan Opera House, New York City, with Mary
    Garden in the title role, supported by Renaud and Dufranne.

  1908. Dec. 2. Debussy's cantata "The Blessed Damosel" given by the
    Oratorio Society in New York City.

  1908. Dec. 8. Gustav Mahler's Second Symphony (C minor) given by
    the Symphony Society in New York City, conducted by the
    composer.

  1908. Dec. 10. Scriabin's fourth symphony "Ecstasy" given by the
    Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1908. Dec. 10. American debut of Mischa Elman, violinist, playing
    Chaikovsky's Violin Concerto.

  1908. Dec. 11. Rubinstein's Pianoforte Fantasia in C major (Op.
    84) given by the New York Philharmonic Society with Josef
    Lhevinne as soloist.

  1908. Dec. 12. Noren's "Kaleidoscope" (theme and variations) given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Dec. 17. Puccini's opera "Le Villi" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1908. Dec. 19. Pierne's cantata "The Children of Bethlehem" given
    at a Young Peoples Concert in New York City. Frank Damrosch,
    conductor.

  1908. Dec. 19. Rubinstein's Fifth Piano Concerto (E flat major)
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1908. Seattle (Wash.) Symphony Orchestra organized, with Michael
    Kegrizi as conductor.

  1908. Signor Gatti-Casazza engaged as manager of the Metropolitan
    Opera House, New York City.

  1908. Oscar Hammerstein's Opera House in Philadelphia opened.

  1909. Jan. 2. O. Nicolai's "Religious Festival" overture on the
    chorale "Eine Feste Burg" given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1909. Jan. 3. Elgar's First Symphony (A flat) given by the New
    York Symphony Society.

  1909. Jan. 6. Catalani's opera "La Wally" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Emmy Destinn and
    Riccardo Martin in the leading parts.

  1909. Jan. 14. Rachmaninof's Second Symphony (E minor) given by
    the Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York City, conducted by
    the composer.

  1909. Jan. 15. Emil Paur's Symphony in A major produced by the
    Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra, conducted by the composer.

  1909. Jan. 16. Schilling's "Harvest Festival" from the opera
    "Moloch" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1909. Jan. 22. American debut of Carl Joern, tenor, in "Die
    Meistersinger" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1909. Jan. 23. Paul Scheinpflug's "Overture to a Comedy of
    Shakespeare" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1909. Feb. 13. Paderewski's Symphony in B minor (Op. 24) produced
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1909. Feb. 19. Smetana's opera "Prodona nev[ve]sta" presented at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Destinn, Joern,
    Didur and Reiss. G. Mahler, conductor.

  1909. Mar. 10. Jan Blockx's opera "La Princesse d'Auberge"
    presented at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with
    Maria Labia and Jeanne Gerville-Reache in the leading roles.

  1909. Mar. 12. A. Bruckner's Eighth Symphony (C minor) given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1909. Mar. 27. A. Maquarre's overture "On the Sea Cliffs" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1909. April 29. First public performance of P. G. Clapp's tone
    poem "Norge" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra in Sanders
    Theater, Cambridge, Mass. Had been performed by the Pierian
    Sodality May 22, 1908.

  1909. April 1. Production of W. W. Gilchrist's passion oratorio
    "The Lamb of God" at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine, New
    York City.

  1909. April 3. Strube's Symphony in B minor played from MS. by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1909. April 17. Arthur Foote's Suite in E major for string
    orchestra produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1909. May 28. Henry K. Hadley's prize composition "The Culprit
    Fay" produced at the Powers Theatre, Grand Rapids, Mich. Played
    by the Chicago Orchestra Oct. 29, and the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra Nov. 14.

  1909. June. G. W. Chadwick's Christmas pastoral "Noel" produced by
    the Litchfield County Choral Union at Norfolk, Conn., conducted
    by the composer.

  1909. Oct. 9. Saint-Saens's ballad on Victor Hugo's "La Fiancee du
    Timbalier" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1909. Oct. 16. Reger's symphonic "Prologue to a Tragedy" (Op. 108)
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1909. Oct. 23. Granville Bantock's comedy overture, "The Pierrot
    of a Minute," given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1909. Oct. 25. American debut of Tilly Koenen (Dutch lieder
    singer) at a recital in Mendelssohn Hall, New York City.

  1909. Nov. 4. American debut (as pianist) of S. Rachmaninof at a
    recital at Smith College, Northampton, Mass.

  1909. Nov. 7. The ballet music from Mozart's pantomime "Les Petits
    Riens" given by the Symphony Society in New York City. Also
    Rimsky-Korsakof's "Russian Song."

  1909. Nov. 8. American debut of Eric Schmedes, tenor, in "Die
    Walkuere" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1909. Nov. 8. Opening of the Boston Opera House under the
    management of Henry Russell, with a performance of "La Gioconda"
    with Lillian Nordica, Louise Homer, Madame Meitschek, F.
    Constantino, Baklanof, Mardones, Pulcini, Stroesco.

  1909. Nov. 10. American operatic debut of John McCormack, noted
    tenor, as _Alfredo_ in "La Traviata," at the Manhattan Opera
    House, New York City.

  1909. Nov. 12. J. M. Ravel's "Rhapsodie Espagnole" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1909. Nov. 15. Massenet's opera "Sappho" presented at the
    Manhattan Opera House, New York City, with Mary Garden in the
    title role.

  1909. Nov. 15. Debussy's "Rondes de Printemps" (Image pour
    Orchestre) given by the Philharmonic Society in New York City.

  1909. Nov. 16. Operatic debut of Alma Gluck as _Sophie_ in
    "Werther" at the New Theatre, New York. She appeared on Dec. 3
    at the Metropolitan Opera House as the _Blessed Spirit_ in
    "Orfeo."

  1909. Nov. 16. American debut of Edmond Clement, noted French
    tenor, in "Werther," at the Manhattan Opera House, New York
    City.

  1909. Nov. 17. American debut of Otto Slezak, Russian tenor, as
    _Otello_ at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1909. Nov. 18. Arensky's "Variations" for strings, given by the
    Russian Symphony Orchestra, New York City.

  1909. Nov. 27. Delius's symphony poem, "Paris, a Night Piece,"
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1909. Nov. 28. Rachmaninof's Third Pianoforte Concerto (Op. 30)
    given by the Symphony Society in New York City with the composer
    as soloist. Also Lalo's "Arlequin."

  1909. Dec. 3. Rachmaninof's tone poem "The Isle of the Dead" given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, conducted by the composer.

  1909. Dec. 5. American debut of Josef Malkin, cellist, as soloist
    in Haydn's "Concerto in D" with the Symphony Society in New York
    City. (N.B. Malkin played at a concert Nov. 28 at the Manhattan
    Opera House.)

  1909. Dec. 14. American debut of Jeanne Maubourg in "Madame Angot"
    at the New Theatre, New York City.

  1909. Dec. 16. Mahler's First Symphony given by the Philharmonic
    Society in New York City.

  1909. Dec. 23. Gluck's opera "Orfeo ed Eurydice" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Homer, Gadski,
    Alson, Gluck. Toscanini conducting.

  1909. Dec. Henry K. Hadley appointed conductor of the Seattle
    (Wash.) Symphony Orchestra.

  1910. Jan. 5. Liza Lehmann, noted song-writer, gave her first
    concert in America at Symphony Hall, Boston, Mass.

  1910. Jan. 5. Production of Wm. Berwald's "Dramatic Overture" by
    the New York Symphony Orchestra, Walter Damrosch, conductor, at
    Syracuse, N. Y.

  1910. Jan. 7. H. K. Hadley's "Symphonic Fantasia" produced by the
    Symphony Orchestra in St. Louis, Mo.

  1910. Jan. 10. Massenet's opera "Griselidis" given at the
    Manhattan Opera House, New York City.

  1910. Jan. 18. P. Volbach's Symphony in B minor given by the
    Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1910. Jan. 23. Franchetti's opera "Germania" given at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Emmy Destinn,
    Caruso, and Amato in the leading parts.

  1910. Jan. 26. Debussy's "Marche Ecossais"; d'Indy's "Souvenirs";
    Rameau's "Dardanus"; P. Dukas's "Ariane et Barbe Bleue"
    (excerpts); G. Pierne's "Ramuntcho," given by the Orchestral
    Club in Boston.

  1910. Feb. 1. R. Strauss's opera "Elektra" given at the Manhattan
    Opera House, New York City, with Madame Mazarin as _Elektra_,
    and Jeanne Gerville-Reache as _Klytemnestra_.

  1910. Feb. 7. Georg Schumann's cantata "Ruth" given by the Apollo
    Musical Society, Chicago.

  1910. Feb. 8. H. Bruneau's opera "L'Attaque du Moulin" presented
    at the New Theatre, Harlem, N. Y.

  1910. Feb. 12. Chadwick's Sinfonietta in D major produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1910. Feb. 13. Sullivan's oratorio "The Golden Legend" given by
    the Handel and Haydn Society in Boston.

  1910. Feb. 15. Max Schilling's symphonic fantasy "Meerguss" given
    by the St. Paul (Minn.) Symphony Orchestra.

  1910. Feb. 20. Moszkowski's Third Orchestral Suite given by the
    Symphony Society in New York City.

  1910. Mar. 4. Glazunof's Violin Concerto in A minor given by the
    Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York City with Mischa Elman as
    soloist.

  1910. Mar. 5. Chaikovsky's opera "Pique Dame" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Emmy Destinn,
    Leonora Sparkes, Alma Gluck, Slezak, and Didur.

  1910. Mar. 6. Granville Bantock's "Fine Old English Tunes"
    arranged for small orchestra; and Haydn's Concerto for Violin
    with A. Saslafsky as soloist, given by the Symphony Society in
    New York City.

  1910. Mar. 11. Busoni's orchestral suite "Turandot" given by the
    Philharmonic Society in New York City.

  1910. Mar. 19. G. Strube's comedy overture "Puck" produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1910. Mar. 27. E. Bossi's "Paradise Lost" given by the Handel and
    Haydn Society in Boston.

  1910. April 16. Ducasse's "Suite Francaise" in D minor, given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1910. April 19. Balakiref's "Ouverture"; C. Franck's "Quatres
    Pieces Breves"; Ducasse's "Variations Plaisantes sur un Theme
    Grave" (harp obbligato); L. Moreau's "Pastorale" for saxophone
    and orchestra (written for Mrs. R. J. Hall, and produced at
    this concert with Mrs. Hall as soloist); and S. Lazzari's
    symphonic poem "Effet de Nuit," given by the Orchestral Club, in
    Boston.

  1910. April 23. Aug. Halm's Symphony in D minor for string
    orchestra given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1910. April 28. Oscar Hammerstein's withdrawal from opera in New
    York and Philadelphia announced. The Metropolitan Opera Company
    purchased rights in opera, contracts with artists, scenic
    equipment, etc.

  1910. June 2. Production of S. Coleridge Taylor's rhapsodie dance,
    "The Bamboula," at Norfolk, Conn.

  1910. Aug. 17. H. F. Gilbert's "Comedy Overture on Negro Themes"
    produced at an open air concert in Central Park, New York City.

  1910. Aug. 29. P. Floridia's opera "Paoletta" produced in
    Cincinnati, O.

  1910. Sept. 29. The first part of Granville Bantock's "Omar
    Khayyam" given at the Worcester (Mass.) Festival.

  1910. Oct. 6. Wallace's symphonic poem "Villon," and Saint-Saens's
    March "Occident and Orient" given by the Symphony Society, New
    York City.

  1910. Oct. 28. Delius's English rhapsody "Brigg Fair" given by the
    Symphony Society, New York City.

  1910. Oct. 29. American debut of Anton Witek, violinist
    (concert-master of the Boston Symphony Orchestra), as soloist.

  1910. Nov. 5. Opening of the Chicago Opera Company under the
    management of Andreas Dippel, with a performance of "Aida."

  1910. Nov. 14. Gluck's opera "Armide" given at the Metropolitan
    Opera House, New York City, with Olive Fremstad, Louise Homer,
    Caruso and Amato.

  1910. Nov. 16. Production at the Boston Opera House of F. S.
    Converse's opera "The Sacrifice."

  1910. Nov. 16. Debussy's opera "L'Enfant Prodigue" given at the
    Boston Opera House, with Alice Neilson, Blanchart, Lasalle, etc.

  1910. Nov. 16. Liadov's "Kikimora" and "Le Lac Enchante," given by
    the Russian Symphony Orchestra, in New York City.

  1910. Nov. 20. Excerpts from Chaikovsky's opera "Jeanne d'Arc"
    given by the Symphony Society, New York City.

  1910. Nov. 16. Mozart's Adagio and Fugue for string orchestra
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1910. Dec. 1. American debut of Kathleen Parlow (Canadian
    violinist) with the Russian Symphony Orchestra, in New York
    City.

  1910. Dec. 1. I. F. Stravinsky's "Feuerwerk" given by the Russian
    Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1910. Dec 4. Dvo[vr]ak's "In the Spinning Room" given by the
    Symphony Society, New York City.

  1910. Dec. 4. R. Laparra's opera "La Habanera" given by the Boston
    Opera Company.

  1910. Dec. 10. Puccini's opera "La Fanciulla" ("The Girl of the
    Golden West") presented at the Metropolitan Opera House, New
    York City, with Emmy Destinn, Caruso and Amato in the leading
    parts.

  1910. Dec. 28. Production (first performance on any stage) of
    Humperdinck's opera "Koenigskinder" with Geraldine Farrar, Marie
    Mattfeld, H. Jadlowker, Otto Goritz, A. Didur and A. Reiss in
    the leading parts. Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1910. Sept. MacDowell Festivals at Peterboro, N. H., instituted
    under the auspices of the MacDowell Memorial Association.

  1910. Gatti-Casazza became sole director of the Metropolitan Opera
    House, on the withdrawal of Andreas Dippel.

  1910. Philadelphia-Chicago Opera Company formed with Andreas
    Dippel as manager.

  1911. Jan. 3. G. Enesco's Suite for Orchestra (Op. 9) given by the
    Philharmonic Orchestra, New York City.

  1911. Jan. 6. Debussy's "Iberia" (second of the third series of
    "Images") given by the Philharmonic Society in, New York City.
    Also Chabrier's "Ode a la Musique."

  1911. Jan. 20. Leo Blech's opera "Versiegelt" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1911. Jan. 25. Saint-Saens's "Ouverture de Fete"; G. Lekew's
    "Adagio for Strings"; Rhene-Baton's "Variations" for pianoforte
    and orchestra; P. Dukas's overture to "Polyeucte"; H.
    Woollett's "Siberia" for saxophone and orchestra (written for
    Mrs. R. J. Hall) (production); Lazzari's (_a_) "Armor," (_b_)
    "Marche pour une Fete Joyeuse," given by the Orchestral Club in
    Boston.

  1911. Jan. 27. Production of Arthur Foote's Serenade in E major
    for strings, by the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra.

  1911. Jan. 28. Gernsheim's tone poem "To a Drama" (Op. 82) given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1911. Feb. 3. Paul Dukas's opera "Ariana et Barbe Bleue" presented
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Geraldine
    Farrar in the title role.

  1911. Feb. 5. Paul Dukas's Symphony in C given by the Symphony
    Society in New York City.

  1911. Feb. 11. Scharwenka's Fourth Pianoforte Concerto (F minor)
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra with the composer as
    soloist.

  1911. Feb. 15. Dvo[vr]ak's posthumous symphony given by the
    Philharmonic Society in New York City.

  1911. Feb. 16. Rachmaninof's "Fantasia" for two pianos and
    orchestra given by the New York Symphony Society.

  1911. Feb. 17. Enesco's Symphony in E flat major given by the
    Symphony Society in New York City.

  1911. Feb. 25. Production of Victor Herbert's opera "Natoma" by
    the Chicago-Philadelphia Opera Company in Philadelphia, with
    Mary Garden, L. Grenville, and John McCormack in the leading
    roles.

  1911. Feb. 27. F. Stock's Suite for String Orchestra given by the
    St. Louis Symphony Orchestra.

  1911. Feb. 27. J. Stransky's "Symphonic Song" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1911. Feb. Symphony by F. Delius produced by the New York Symphony
    Society.

  1911. Mar. 3. Chabrier's unfinished opera "Briseis" given, in
    concert form, by the MacDowell Chorus in New York City.

  1911. Mar. 3. Victor Kolar's symphonic poem "Hiawatha" given by
    the Symphony Society, New York City.

  1911. Mar. 4. R. Mandl's "Overture to a Gascon Comedy" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1911. Mar. 6. A. Perelli's opera "A Lover's Quarrel" given at
    Philadelphia.

  1911. Mar. 11. Sinigaglia's overture "Le Baruffe Chiozzotte" given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1911. Mar. 14. Production of the opera "Mona," libretto by Brian
    Hooker and music by H. W. Parker, at the Metropolitan Opera
    House, New York City.

  1911. Mar. 24. Wolf-Ferrari's opera "The Secret of Suzanne"
    presented by the Philadelphia-Chicago Opera Company in
    Philadelphia.

  1911. Mar. 25-30. Brahms Festival held in New York City by the
    Symphony and Oratorio Societies.

  1911. Mar. 25. Jean Nougues's opera "Quo Vadis" presented in
    Philadelphia by the Chicago-Philadelphia Opera Company.

  1911. April. The Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra visited New York
    for the first time, as guest of the Philharmonic Society.

  1911. April 10. Felix Woyrsch's Mystery for soli, chorus,
    orchestra and organ, "Toedtentanz" given by the Apollo Musical
    Society in Chicago.

  1911. April 15. Production of G. W. Chadwick's "Suite Symphonique"
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1911. April 22. Production of Arthur S. Curry's symphonic poem
    "Attala" by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, conducted by the
    composer.

  1911. May 19. Death, in Vienna, of Gustav Mahler, conductor of the
    Philharmonic Orchestra of New York City.

  1911. June 6. Production of Horatio Parker's "Collegiate
    Overture," and Henry K. Hadley's symphony, "North, South, East
    and West," by the Litchfield County Choral Union at Norfolk,
    Conn., under the direction of the composers.

  1911. Aug. 10. Production of Henry K. Hadley's tone poem "The
    Atonement of Pan" by the Bohemian Club at San Francisco, Cal.

  1911. Sept. 27. Max Reger's "The Nuns" given at the Worcester
    (Mass.) Festival.

  1911. Oct. 7. Production of Max Reger's "A Comedy Overture" by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1911. Oct. 28. Granville Bantock's poem "Dante and Beatrice" given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, and at the same concert Efrem
    Zimbalist, violinist, made his American debut, playing
    Glazunof's Concerto (Op. 82).

  1911. Nov. 2. Josef Stransky made his appearance as conductor of
    the Philharmonic Society in New York City.

  1911. Nov. 2. Aeolian Hall (New York City) opened with a recital
    by Gottfried Galston, pianist.

  1911. Nov. 4. Margarete Matzenauer made her American debut as
    _Aida_ at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1911. Nov. 18. Ludwig Thuille's opera "Lobetanz" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Gadski, Jadlowker,
    etc.

  1911. Nov. 18. Grieg's "Old Norwegian Romance" with variations,
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1911. Nov. 24. Elgar's Second Symphony (E flat) given by the
    Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1911. Nov. 25. Balakiref's overture on the theme of a Spanish
    March given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1911. Nov. 26. Laucella's symphonic poem "Consalvo" produced by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1911. Dec. 10. Debut of Arthur Shattuck, pianist, in the
    Rachmaninof concerto, with the Symphony Society of New York
    City.

  1911. Dec. 11. Liszt's oratorio "The Legend of St. Elizabeth"
    given by the MacDowell Chorus at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1911. Dec. 17. Production of J. van der Pals's two symphonic
    pieces "Autumn" and "Spring" by the Philharmonic Society, New
    York City.

  1911. Dec. 28. Weingaertner's Third Symphony (E major) given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1911. A Symphony Orchestra formed in Kansas City, Mo., under Carl
    Busch.

  1911. Symphony Orchestra in San Francisco, Cal., formed, and Henry
    K. Hadley appointed conductor.

  1912. Jan. 3. Wolf Ferrari's opera "Le Donne Curiose" presented at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Farrar,
    Maubourg, Jadlowker, Scotti and Didur.

  1912. Jan. 7. American debut of Wilhelm Bachaus, pianist, in
    Beethoven's "Emperor" Concerto, with the Symphony Society, New
    York City.

  1912. Jan. 9. American debut of Elena Gerhardt, lieder singer in
    New York City.

  1912. Jan. 10. American debut of Vanni Marcoux, French baritone,
    as _Golaud_ in "Pelleas et Melisande" at the Boston Opera House.

  1912. Jan. 16. Production of P. G. Clapp's prelude "In Summer" by
    the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Jan. 16. Wolf-Ferrari's opera "The Jewels of the Madonna"
    given at the Auditorium by the Chicago Opera Company, with
    Carolina White in the leading role, Sammarco, Dufau, Daddi,
    etc., assisting.

  1912. Jan. 26. Production of F. S. Converse's symphonic poem
    "Ormazd" by the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Jan. 26. Delius's tone poem "In a Summer Garden" given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1912. Jan. 27. Massenet's opera "Don Quichotte" presented at the
    French Opera House, New Orleans, La.

  1912. Feb. 2. Production of Geo. F. Boyle's "Pianoforte Concerto
    in D minor" by the Philharmonic Society, New York City, with
    Ernest Hutcheson as soloist.

  1912. Feb. 4. Production of two symphonic sketches from F.
    Stahlberg's "Im Hochland," by the Philharmonic Society, New York
    City.

  1912. Feb. 11. Production of Mary Lawrence Townsend's "Serenade"
    by the Russian Symphony Orchestra, New York City.

  1912. Feb. 12. Debussy's mystery "Le Martyre de St. Sebastien"
    given by the MacDowell Chorus, in New York City.

  1912. Feb. 14. American debut of Lucille Marcel as _Tosca_, in
    Boston.

  1912. Feb. 16. Victor Kolar's symphonic poem "A Fairy Tale"
    produced by the Symphony Society in New York City.

  1912. Mar. 3. Saint-Saens's "Hymn to Pallas Athene" given by the
    Symphony Society, New York City.

  1912. Mar. 11. F. Schmitt's "Rhapsodie Viennoise" (production);
    P. Gaubert's "Poeme Elegiaque" for saxophone and orchestra
    (production written for and played by Mrs. R. J. Hall); A.
    Roussel's "Poeme de la Foret" (production); Roger Ducasse's
    "Petit Suite" (production), given at an Orchestral Concert in
    Boston under the management of Mrs. R. J. Hall.

  1912. Mar. 15. J. G. Mraczek's "Symphonic Burlesque" for grand
    orchestra given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Mar. 16. Production of F. Stahlberg's "Symphonic Scherzo" by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1912. Mar. 25. Brahms's "Triumphlied" for chorus and orchestra
    given in New York City.

  1912. April 7. Max Reger's "Romantic" and "Ballet" Suites, given
    by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1912. April 8. First appearance in America of the London (England)
    Symphony Orchestra, A. Nikisch, conductor, at Carnegie Hall, New
    York City.

  1912. April 14. Production of P. G. Clapp's "Dramatic Poem," by
    the Pierian Sodality of Harvard University, at the Hotel Astor,
    New York City.

  1912. April 14. Monteverde's opera "Orfeo" given in concert form
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Rita
    Fornia, M. Duchene, Anna Case, H. Weil, H. Witherspoon and Basil
    Ruysdael.

  1912. May. Production of Arne Oldberg's "Symphonic Variations" at
    the North Shore Festival, Evanston, Ill.

  1912. May 16. Production of Wm. Berwald's overture "Walthari" by
    the New York Symphony Orchestra, Walter Damrosch, conductor, at
    the Central New York Music Festival, Syracuse, N. Y.

  1912. June 4. Production of G. W. Chadwick's symphonic fantasie
    "Aphrodite" by the Litchfield County Choral Union, at Norfolk,
    Conn.

  1912. June 5. Production of Henry F. Gilbert's "Negro Rhapsody,"
    also Coleridge Taylor's Concerto for Violin, his "Negro Air" for
    solo violin and orchestra, and "A Tale of Old Japan," by the
    Litchfield County Choral Union, at Norfolk, Conn.

  1912. Oct. Leopold Stokowski, having severed his connection with
    the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra in March, appeared as
    conductor of the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Oct. 30. A. Schoenberg's "Five Pieces for Orchestra" given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Oct. 30. E. Schelling's "Legende Symphonique" given by the
    Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Nov. 4. Debut of Titta Ruffo as the _Duke_ in "Rigoletto,"
    with the Chicago-Philadelphia Company at Philadelphia, Pa.

  1912. Nov. 7. Delius's symphonic poem "Life's Dance" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Nov. 7. Goldmark's opera "Das Heimchen am Herd" presented at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, Philadelphia, with Maggie Teyte,
    Mabel Riegelman, Helen Stanley, Riccardo Martin, and Henri
    Scott, in the leading parts, and Arnold Winternitz conducting.

  1912. Nov. 8. Maurice Ravel's orchestral suite "Ma Mere l'Oye"
    given at a concert in Aeolian Hall, New York City. And at the
    same concert William Becher's "Pianoforte Concerto" was
    produced.

  1912. Nov. 13. R. Strauss's "Festival Prelude" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1912. Nov. 14. Weingaertner's "Lustige Overture" given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1912. Nov. 15. Dr. Ernest Kunwald appeared as conductor of the
    Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Nov. 16. Ernest Fanelli's symphonic pictures "Thebes" given
    by the Symphony Society, New York City.

  1912. Nov. 19. Max Reger's "Concerto in Ancient Style" given at
    the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, New York City, by the Philharmonic
    Society.

  1912. Nov. 21. Bruckner's Sixth Symphony (A major), and Korngold's
    "Overture to a Play," given by the Philharmonic Society, New
    York City.

  1912. Nov. 21. Ippolitof-Ivanof's "Armenian Rhapsodie," given by
    the Russian Symphony Orchestra at its tenth anniversary concert
    in New York City.

  1912. Dec. 3. Cornelius Dopper's third symphony "Rembrandt" (in C
    minor) given by the St. Paul (Minn.) Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Dec. 3. Louis Koemmenich made his first appearance as
    conductor of the Oratorio Society of New York City, at a
    performance of "Elijah," on the resignation of Frank Damrosch.

  1912. Dec. 6. G. Fitelberg's tone poem "Das Lied vom Falken" given
    by the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Dec. 13. Production of David S. Smith's Symphony in F minor
    by the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Dec. 14. Borodin's Second Symphony (D minor) given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Dec. 21. Klughardt's "Concerto for Violoncello" (Op. 59)
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1912. Dec. 27. American debut of Frieda Hempel, noted soprano, as
    _Marguerite_ in "Les Huguenots" at the Metropolitan Opera House,
    New York City.

  1912. Dec. 29. The "Jena Symphony" (ascribed to Beethoven, and
    discovered in the archives of the University of Jena) given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra. This work was played publicly for
    the first time at St. Petersburg, Dec. 1911.

  1912. Philharmonic Society of New York reorganized in such a
    manner as to secure the Pulitzer bequest of $500,000.

  1913. Jan. 11. Joseph Holbrooke's symphonic poem "Queen Mab" given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1913. Jan. 16. Arensky's "Serenade" given by the Russian Symphony
    Orchestra, New York City.

  1913. Jan. 16. American debut of Max Pauer, noted pianist, in New
    York City.

  1913. Jan. 25. Production of Gustav Strube's symphonic poems
    "Narcissus" and "Echo" by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1913. Feb. 6. Zandonai's opera "Conchita" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, Philadelphia, with Tarquina Tarquini
    in the title role, by the Philadelphia-Chicago Opera Company.

  1913. Feb. 15. Ernest Lendvai's "Symphony in D major" given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1913. Feb. 20. Perelli's opera "A Lover's Quarrel" given by the
    Chicago-Philadelphia Company, in Philadelphia, with Zepelli,
    Sammarco, and Berat.

  1913. Feb. 24. Wilhelm Kienzl's opera "Les Ranz des Vaches" given
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, Philadelphia, by the
    Chicago-Philadelphia Opera Company.

  1913. Feb. 27. Production of Walter Damrosch's opera "Cyrano de
    Bergerac" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with
    Amito and Frances Alda in the leading roles, and Alfred Hertz
    conducting.

  1913. Feb. 27. Production of J. Stransky's two symphony songs,
    "Moonrise" and "Requiem," by the Philharmonic Society, New York
    City.

  1913. Mar. 2. Sibelius's Symphony No. 4 given by the New York
    Symphony Society.

  1913. Mar. 8. Vivaldi's "Concerto in G minor" for violin, organ
    and orchestra, given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1913. Mar. 8. Louis Aubert's opera "La Foret Bleue" given at the
    Boston Opera House with Carmen Melis, Bernice Fisher, Elizabeth
    Amsden, Jeska Swartz, Riddez and Potter. Caplet conducting.

  1913. Mar. 8. Mussorgsky's opera "Boris Godunof" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Anna Case, Jeanne
    Maubourg, Louise Homer, Paul Althouse and Didur.

  1913. Mar. 23. Leoncavallo's opera "Zingari" presented by the
    Chicago Opera Company, conducted by the composer, at Chicago.

  1913. Mar. 28. O. Taubmann's "A Choral Service" given by the
    Oratorio Society, New York City.

  1913. April 17. R. Strauss's "Der Abend" (16 parts), and Granville
    Bantock's choral symphony "Atalanta in Calydon" (20 parts), also
    Percy Grainger's "Folk Tune Settings," given by the MacDonell
    Chorus in New York City.

  1913. June 3. Production of Edgar S. Kelley's second symphony
    "New England" by the Litchfield County Choral Union at Norfolk,
    Conn.

  1913. Oct. 2. G. Pierne's oratorio "St. Francis of Assisi" given
    at the Worcester (Mass.) Festival.

  1913. Nov. 11. Florent Schmitt's _drame muet_ "La Tragedie de
    Salome" given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1913. Nov. 14. Jaernefelt's "Praeludium" given by the Russian
    Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1913. Nov. 20. Franchetti's opera "Cristoforo Colombo" presented
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, Philadelphia, by the
    Chicago-Philadelphia Opera Company, with Rosa Raisa, Titta
    Ruffo, and Bassi in the leading roles, and Campanini conducting.

  1913. Nov. 21. Production of Gustav Strube's symphonic poem
    "Loreley" by the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra.

  1913. Nov. 21. Arthur Hinton's Second Symphony (C minor) given by
    the Minneapolis (Minn.) Symphony Orchestra.

  1913. Nov. 28. Operatic debut of Sophie Braslau (contralto) at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, as _Prince Feodor_ in
    "Boris Godounov."

  1913. Nov. 28. F. Arbos's "Guajiras" for violin and orchestra
    given by the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra, with Bonarios
    Grimson as soloist.

  1913. Dec. 5. H. Fevrier's opera "Monna Vanna" presented at the
    Boston Opera House, with Mary Garden, Jeska Swartz, L. Muratore
    and Vanni Marcoux.

  1913. Dec. 9. R. Strauss' opera "Der Rosenkavalier" given at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Frieda Hempel, M.
    Ober, H. Weil, Carl Joern and Otto Goritz. Hertz conducting.

  1913. Dec. 12. Elgar's symphonic study "Falstaff" given by the
    Symphony Society, New York City.

  1913. Dec. 18. F. Schmitt's "Psaulme XLVI" given by the Cecilia
    Society in Boston.

  1913. Dec. 27. Ravel's fantasy "Juon" and "Vaegtervise"
    (Watchman's Song) given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1914. Jan. 2. Albert Roussel's evocation "La Ville Rose" given by
    the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1914. Jan. 2. Montemezzi's opera "L'Amore di Tre Re" presented at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Boni, Braslau,
    Amato and Didur. Toscanini conducting.

  1914. Jan. 6. W. Stenhammer's "Midwinter" given by the Minneapolis
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1914. Jan. 16. Gabriel Pierne's orchestration of C. Franck's
    "Prelude, Chorale, and Fugue" for pianoforte, given by the
    Symphony Society, New York City.

  1914. Jan. 20. R. Zandonai's "O Padre Nostro" for male voices,
    organ and orchestra, from "Purgatory," given by the Schola
    Cantorum in New York City.

  1914. Jan. 24. Production of Victor Herbert's one-act opera
    "Madeline" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with
    Alda, Sparkes, Althouse, Segurola and Pini-Corsi.

  1914. Jan. 25. Production of G. Huee's "Fantasie" for flute and
    orchestra, with G. Barrere as soloist; also V. Kolar's "Suite"
    for orchestra, and Lekew's "Adagio" for strings, by the Symphony
    Society in New York City.

  1914. Feb. 6. Production of M. Kernochan's cantata "The Foolish
    Virgins" by the Orange Musical Art Society at East Orange, N. J.

  1914. Feb. 12. J. G. Ropartz's symphonic etude "The Hunt of Prince
    Arthur" given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1914. Feb. 17. Spendiarof's symphonic poem "The Three Palms" given
    by the Russian Symphony Orchestra, New York City.

  1914. Feb. 19. Production of Mabel W. Daniels's "The Guests of
    Sleep" by the Cecilia Society in Boston.

  1914. Feb. 26. Vittorio Gnecchi's opera "Cassandra" given at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, Philadelphia, by the
    Chicago-Philadelphia Opera Company, with Rosa Raisa, J.
    Claussen, and Dalmores. Sturani, conductor.

  1914. Feb. 26. Charpentier's opera "Julien" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Farrar, Caruso,
    and Gilly.

  1914. Mar. 7. Production of Otto Urack's first symphony (E major)
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, conducted by the composer.

  1914. Mar. 14. Production of R. Goldmark's tone poem "Samson" by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1914. Mar. 25. Wolf-Ferrari's opera "L'Amore Medico" presented at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with L. Boni, B.
    Alten, L. Rothier, Pini-Corsi, Segurola. Toscanini conducting.

  1914. April 2. Production of Francis Pauly's Pianoforte Concerto
    in E flat, by the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra, with Florence
    Pauly as soloist.

  1914. April 3. Production of Eric Korngold's Sinfonietta (Op. 5)
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1914. April 5. Production of Wm. Berwald's cantata "The Seven Last
    Words of Christ" by the St. Thomas Church Choir, New York City.
    Tertius Noble, organist and director.

  1914. April 11. Production of P. G. Clapp's "Symphony in E minor"
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, conducted by the composer.

  1914. April 19. The Fort Worth (Texas) Symphony Orchestra
    organized under Carl Venth. Produced several works by American
    composers, including Carl Venth's "Prologue to an Indian Drama."

  1914. April 25. Reznicek's Symphonishes Lebensbild "Schlemihl"
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1914. May 28. Production of "Cahokia," the pageant and masque of
    St. Louis (music by F. S. Converse), at Forest Park, St. Louis,
    Mo.

  1914. June 2. Production of H. K. Hadley's tone poem "Lucifer" at
    the Litchfield County Choral Union Festival, Norfolk, Conn.,
    conducted by the composer.

  1914. June. Production of Coleridge Taylor's orchestral rhapsody
    "From the Prairie" (Arthur Mees, conductor), and J. Sibelius's
    orchestral tone poem "Aalloteret," by the Litchfield County
    Choral Union, at Norfolk, Conn., conducted by the composer.

  1914. Aug. 20. Production of Arthur Nevin's suite "Love Dreams" at
    the MacDowell Festival, Peterboro, N. H.

  1914. Aug. Henry F. Gilbert's music to Synge's play "Riders to the
    Sea" produced at a MacDowell Festival, Peterboro, N. H.,
    conducted by the composer.

  1914. Oct. 23. Roussel's ballet pantomime "Le Festin de
    l'Araignee" given by the Symphony Society of New York City.

  1914. Oct. 23. Dohnanyi's Suite for Orchestra (Op. 19) given by
    the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra.

  1914. Oct. 24. Ropartz's Fourth Symphony (C major) given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1914. Nov. 6. Hugo Alfven's Third Symphony (E minor) given by the
    Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra.

  1914. Nov. 29. Symphonic fragment from Ravel's Ballet "Daphnis and
    Chloe" given by the Symphony Society of New York City.

  1914. Dec. 13. Hugo Alfven's "Festspel-Polonaise" given by the
    Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra.

  1914. American Symphony Orchestra organized in Chicago with Glenn
    Dillard Gunn as conductor.

  1914. Great organ with 7000 pipes installed at the Pan-American
    Exposition in San Francisco, Cal.

  1915. Jan. 4. F. Leoni's opera "L'Oracolo" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Bori, Braslau,
    Scotti and Didur.

  1915. Jan. 8. Theophile Ysaye's "Fantasia on a Popular Walloon
    Theme" given by the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra.

  1915. Jan. 17. First public performance of Edmund Severn's Violin
    Concerto in D minor given by the Philharmonic Society, New York
    City, with Max Pilser as soloist.

  1915. Jan. 25. Production of U. Giordano's opera "Madame
    Sans-Gene" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with
    Geraldine Farrar, Leonora Sparkes, Amato, Martinelli, and
    Segurola. Toscanini conducting.

  1915. Jan. 30. Notable revival of Beethoven's opera "Fidelio" at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Matzenauer and
    Urlus in the leading roles.

  1915. Jan. 31. Roger Ducasse's "La Jolie Jeu de Furet" given by
    the Symphony Society of New York City.

  1915. Jan. 31. Production of Henry Burck's "Meditation" for
    strings; and Nicola Laucella's "Prelude and Temple Dance" given
    by the Philharmonic Society in New York City.

  1915. Feb. 5. S. Stojowski's Suite for Orchestra in E flat major
    given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1915. Feb. 13. S. E. Bortkiewitch's Pianoforte Concerto in B flat
    major given by the Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York City,
    with Margaret Volovy as soloist.

  1915. Feb. 22. F. Cowen's oratorio "The Veil" given by the Apollo
    Musical Society in Chicago.

  1915. Mar. 19. Production of John Alden Carpenter's orchestral
    suite "Adventures in a Perambulator" by the Chicago Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1915. Mar. 19. Production of Scriabin's "Poem of Fire--Prometheus"
    by the Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York City. (Had been
    played in Chicago Mar. 5, but without effects of light.)

  1915. Mar. 27. First of Reger's "Four Tone Poems" for orchestra
    (after Boecklin) given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1915. April 3. F. Klose's Prelude and Double Fugue for Organ, with
    choral for trumpets and trombones, given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1915. June 3. Production of G. W. Chadwick's ballade for orchestra
    "Tam O'Shanter" at the Litchfield County Choral Union Festival,
    Norfolk, Conn.

  1915. June. Production of F. A. Stock's Violin Concerto, under
    direction of the composer, with Efrem Zimbalist as soloist, and
    C. V. Stanford's "Pianoforte Concerto in G major" (first time in
    America) with Harold Bauer as soloist, at the Litchfield County
    Choral Union Festival, Norfolk, Conn.

  1915. Summer. Walter Damrosch's incidental music to the Greek play
    "Iphigenia in Aulis" produced at the Greek Theatre, Berkeley,
    Cal. (Was given in New York Dec. 15 the same year.)

  1915. July 1. Production of H.W. Parker and Brian Hooker's opera
    "Fairyland" at Los Angeles, Cal. This opera won the prize
    offered by the Los Angeles Opera Association.

  1915. Aug. 7. Production of Edward F. Schneider's opera "Apollo"
    at Bohemian Grove, Cal.

  1915. Oct. 22. Further excerpts from Ravel's ballet "Daphnis and
    Chloe" given by the Symphony Society of New York City.

  1915. Nov. 5. F. Delius's "A Dance Rhapsody" given by the
    Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra.

  1915. Nov. 5. Arnold Schoenberg's "Kammer Symphonie" given by the
    Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1915. Nov. 9. Production of Clarence Loomis's Pianoforte Concerto
    by the American Symphony Orchestra, Chicago, with Glenn Dillard
    Gunn as soloist.

  1915. Nov. 9. Production of Carlo Minetti's Aria for tenor and
    orchestra, with George Hamlin as soloist, by the American
    Symphony Orchestra in Chicago. This work won a prize offered by
    George Hamlin.

  1915. Nov. 18. Schoenberg's symphonic poem "Pelleas et Melisande"
    given by the Philharmonic Society in New York City.

  1915. Nov. 26. Delius's Pianoforte Concerto in C minor given by
    the Philharmonic Society in New York City, with Percy Grainger
    as soloist.

  1915. Dec. 9. Saint-Saens's opera "Dejanire" presented by the
    Chicago Opera Company with Carmen Melis, de Cisneros, and
    Muratore. Campanini conducting.

  1915. Dec. 30. Borodin's opera "Prince Igor" given at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with F. Alda, F.
    Perini, Amato, Segurola, and Didur. Polacco conducting.

  1915. Dec. 31. Production of Edward B. Hill's symphonic poem "The
    Parting of Lancelot and Guinevere" by the St. Louis Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1915. Dec. 31. Schelling's theme and variations for orchestra
    "Impressions, from an Artist's Life," given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra with the composer as soloist.

  1915. The San Francisco Symphony Orchestra reorganized with Alfred
    Hertz as conductor.

  1915. The Baltimore Symphony Orchestra organized with Gustav
    Strube as conductor.

  1916. Jan. 7. Duka's dance poem "La Peri," given by the San
    Francisco Symphony Orchestra, A. Hertz conducting.

  1916. Jan. 10. Massenet's opera "Cleopatre" presented by the
    Chicago Opera Company at the Auditorium with M. Kuznetsof in the
    title role.

  1916. Jan. 15. Stravinsky's "First Symphony" (E flat) given by the
    Russian Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1916. Jan. 20. Fibich's idyll for orchestra "At Evening" given by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1916. Jan. 23. F. Schmitt's "Pupazzi" given by the Symphony
    Society of New York City.

  1916. Jan. 28. Production of E. Granados's opera "Goyescas" at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Anna Fitziu, F.
    Perini, Martinelli, and de Luca. Bavagnoli conducting.

  1916. Feb. 4. Production of F. Stahlberg's Suite for Orchestra
    (Op. 53) given by the Philharmonic Society of New York City.

  1916. Feb. 5. Centennial anniversary performance of Rossini's
    opera "The Barber of Seville" at the Metropolitan Opera House,
    New York City, with Madame Barrientos as _Rosina_.

  1916. Feb. 6. Production of Seth Bingham's Suite for Orchestra by
    the Philharmonic Society of New York City.

  1916. Feb. 11. Production of Arthur Shepherd's overture "The
    Festival of Youth" by the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra.

  1916. Feb. 17. Rimsky's-Korsakof's "Serbian Fantaisie" and G.
    Huee's suite "Croquois d'Orient" given by the Symphony Society of
    New York City.

  1916. Feb. 18. Production of Daniel Gregory Mason's First Symphony
    (C minor) by the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1916. Mar. 3. Gustav Mahler's "Giant Symphony" (Eighth) given by
    the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra with more than one thousand
    performers.

  1916. Mar. 10. Production of J. A. Carpenter's "Concertino" by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra, with Percy Grainger as pianist.

  1916. April 23. Victor Louis Saar's "Suite Rococo" given by the
    Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1916. April 25. R. Strauss's "Alpine Symphony" given by the
    Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1916. April 25. Production of Franz C. Bornschein's cantata
    "Onawa" at the Tri-City Musical Festival at Paterson, N. J.
    (This work won the prize offered by the New Jersey Choral
    Society.)

  1916. May 4. V. d'Indy's prize choral work "Le Chant de la Cloche"
    given by the Cecilia Society in Boston.

  1956. June. Production by the Litchfield County Choral Union at
    Norfolk, Conn., of Percy Grainger's suite for orchestra "In a
    Nutshell" conducted by the composer; C. M. Loeffler's symphony
    "Hora Mystica" conducted by the composer.

  1916. July 12-16. Production at the Seattle Festival of State
    Federation of Musical Clubs of C. W. Cadman's symphonic fantasy
    "To a Vanishing Race" and J. H. Howe's "Festival Overture."

  1916. Oct. 16. Ernest Bloch's two poems, "Winter" and "Spring,"
    played at the 44th St. Theatre, New York City. (They were given
    by the New Symphony Orchestra, New York City, on Nov. 5, 1919.)

  1916. Oct. 20. Schelling's "Violin Concerto" produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra with Fritz Kreisler as soloist.

  1916. Oct. 26. J. M. Ravel's "Valses Nobles et Sentimentales"
    given by the Symphony Society, New York City.

  1916. Oct. 29. C. S. Skilton's "Two Indian Dances," (1) "Deer
    Dance" (Rogue River, Ore.), and (2) "War Dance" (Cheyenne),
    produced by the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra. (They had been
    played as a string quartet in January by the Zoellner Quartet.)

  1916. Nov. 13. Bizet's opera "Les Pecheurs des Perles" presented
    entire at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City. (Two acts
    were given in 1897.)

  1916. Nov. 18. American debut of Amelita Galli-Curci, as _Gilda_
    in "Rigoletto" with the Chicago Opera Company in Chicago. L.
    Campanini conducting.

  1916. Nov. 24. Michael Dvorsky's Symphonic Duologue for pianoforte
    and orchestra, produced by the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra
    with Josef Hofmann (M. Dvorsky) as soloist.

  1916. Nov. 25. Gluck's opera "Iphigenia in Tauris" presented at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Melanie Kurt,
    Marie Rappold, L. Sparkes, Sembach, Weil.

  1916. Nov. 26. Elgar's adagio "Sospiri," for strings, harps, and
    organ, given by the Symphony Society of New York City; also
    Sinigaglia's "Etude Caprice" for strings.

  1916. Dec. 3. M. Ravel's "Introduction et Allegro" for harp,
    strings, quartet, flute and clarinet, given by the Symphony
    Society, New York City.

  1916. Dec. 14. Gustav Mahler's "Lied von der Erde" given by the
    Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1916. Dec. 22, Zandonai's opera "Francesca da Rimini" presented at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1917. Jan. 12. Sibelius's symphonic fantasy "Polyola's Daughter,"
    and his symphonic poem "Night Ride and Sunrise" (Op. 53), given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1917. Jan. 18. Leo Sowerby's "Come Autumn Time" produced at a
    concert in Orchestral Hall, Chicago, conducted by Eric De
    Lamarter.

  1917. Jan. 19. Ballantine's symphonic poem "The Eve of St. Agnes"
    produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1917. Jan. 26. Percy Grainger's "The Warriors" given by the
    Symphony Society at Aeolian Hall, New York City, with the
    composer at the pianoforte.

  1917. Feb. 2. Widor's Symphony No. 3 (in E minor) for organ and
    orchestra given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City, with
    Gilbert Spross as soloist.

  1917. Mar. 8. Reginald de Koven's opera "The Canterbury Pilgrims"
    produced at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with
    Ober, Althouse, Ruysdael, and Sembach.

  1917. Mar. 23. The First of E. Bloch's "Trois poems Juifs" (Op.
    133), "Dance," "Rite," and "Cortege Funebre," presented by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1917. Feb. 6. E. De Lamarter's "The Fable of the Hapless
    Folktune" produced by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1917. April 6. Philip Greeley Clapp's Symphony in E flat produced
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1917. April 13. Debussy's "Gigues" given by the Boston Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1917. April 15. Adolf Brune's overture "A Twilight Picture"
    produced by the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1917. April 20. Noren's symphony "Vita" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1917. April 27. F. S. Converse's tone poem "Ave atque Vale"
    produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1917. May 3. Ernest Bloch's "Two Psalms," for soprano and
    orchestra, given in New York City.

  1917. June. Production of the following works by the Litchfield
    County Choral Union at Norfolk, Conn.: Nicola Laucella's
    symphonic impressions "Whitehouse" under the direction of the
    composer. John Alden Carpenter's symphony "Sermons in Stones"
    conducted by F. Stock. Percy Grainger's "The Warriors" (Music to
    an Imaginary Ballet) conducted by the composer. First
    performance in America of C. Villiers Stanford's "Irish
    Rhapsody" No. 5 (dedicated to Lord Roberts).

  1917. Oct. 7. First concert of the Chicago Philharmonic Orchestra,
    recently organized, under Arthur Dunham, conductor.

  1917. Oct. 26. Mozart's operetta "Bastien et Bastienne" presented
    at the Empire Theatre, New York City, under Albert Reiss.

  1917. Oct. 27. American debut of Jascha Heifetz, Russian
    violinist, in a recital at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1917. Nov. 12. Mascagni's opera "Isabeau" presented at the
    Auditorium, Chicago, by the Chicago Opera Association, with Rosa
    Raisa, Jeska Swartz, Crimi, Rimini, Maguenat, and Nicolay.
    Campanini conducting.

  1917. Nov. 17. S. M. Liapounov's Second Concerto for pianoforte
    given by the Russian Symphony Orchestra, New York City, with
    Tamara Labinova (debut) as soloist.

  1917. Nov. 17. American debut, as conductor, of Pierre Monteux,
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City,--a matinee
    performance of "Faust."

  1917. Nov. 19. Operatic debut of Anna Fitziu as _Tosca_ with the
    Chicago Opera Association.

  1917. Nov. 29. Debut of May Peterson as _Michaela_, in "Carmen,"
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1917. Nov. 30. S. Palmgren's Second Symphony given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1917. Nov. 30. Max Bruch's Concerto for Two Pianofortes and
    Orchestra given by the Philharmonic Society in New York City,
    with Rose and Ottilie Sutro as pianists. (First time in New
    York.)

  1917. Dec. 1. Operatic debut of Genevieve Vix as _Manon_ with the
    Chicago Opera Association.

  1917. Dec. 6. Liszt's "Twenty-third Psalm" given with chorus and
    orchestra by the Philharmonic Society, New York City, Vernon
    Stiles, soloist. J. Stransky, conductor.

  1917. Dec. 6. Frederick Jacobi's orchestral suite "California"
    produced at the Cort Theatre, San Francisco, Cal., by the San
    Francisco Symphony Orchestra.

  1917. Dec. 14. Widor's "Prelude" for organ, three trumpets, three
    trombones, and kettledrums, given by the Chicago Symphony
    Orchestra.

  1917. Dec. 19. Henri Rabaud's opera "Marouf" presented by the
    Metropolitan Opera Company, New York City, with F. Alda, K.
    Howard, de Luca, Rothier, de Segurola, T. Chalmers, Rossi. P.
    Monteux conducting.

  1917. Dec. 26. Arthur Hadley's opera "Azora" produced by the
    Chicago Opera Association, with Anna Fitziu, Cyrena van Gordon,
    and F. Lamont. Conducted by the composer.

  1917. Dec. 28. Henry K. Hadley awarded the Hinshaw prize for an
    opera, "Bianca," for small orchestra, without chorus.

  1917. A Symphony Orchestra organized in New Orleans, La.

  1917. Dec. 27. Production of Percy Mackaye and Arthur Farwell's
    masque "The Evergreen Tree," by the MacDowell Club, assisted by
    the Manuscript Society and Prospect Heights (Brooklyn) Choral
    Society, in New York City.

  1918. Jan. 3. Liszt's oratorio "St. Elizabeth" presented in
    operatic form at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City,
    with Florence Easton, M. Matzenauer, Clarence Whitehill,
    Schlegel, Leonard and Ruysdael. Bodansky conducting.

  1918. Jan. 5. World premiere of Arthur Nevin's one-act opera,
    "Daughter of the Forest," by the Chicago Opera Association, with
    Vix, Peralta, Lamont, and Godfrey. Conducted by the composer.

  1918. Jan. 6. Hubay's Concerto for Violin and Orchestra given by
    the Symphony Society, New York City, at Aeolian Hall, with E.
    Zimbalist as soloist. Also, Kalikinnov's Second Symphony (in G
    minor).

  1918. Jan. 10. E. Bloch's "Trois Poemes Juifs"--"Danse," "Rite,"
    and "Cortege Funebre"--given by the Symphony Society, New York
    City.

  1918. Jan. 12. Mascagni's opera "Lodoletta" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with G. Farrar, Lila
    Robeson, Caruso, de Segurola, Amato, Didur, and Cecil Arden.
    Moranzoni conducting.

  1918. Jan. 12. American debut of Max Rosen, violinist, in
    Goldmark's violin concerto in A minor, with the Philharmonic
    Society, New York City.

  1918. Jan. 18. Gliere's third symphony (B minor) "Ilia Mourometz"
    given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, F. Stock conducting.

  1918. Jan. 19. World premiere of Sylvio Lazzari's opera, "Le
    Sauteriot," by the Chicago Opera Association, with G. Vix,
    Carolina Lazzari, Myrna Sharlow, M. Claessens, Dalmores,
    Dufranne.

  1918. Jan. 19. Jurassorsky's symphonic poem "The Phantoms,"
    Speniarov's legend, "The Sermon of Resia," Rachmaninov's
    "Veralize" (arranged for orchestra by M. Atshuler),
    Rimsky-Korsakov's four tableaux from "Le Coq d'Or," and
    Slavinski's "The Shepherdess and the Faun," given by the Russian
    Symphony Orchestra in New York City.

  1918. Jan. 25. F. Borowski's "Peintures Portrait d'une Jeune
    Fille," "Le Jardin de Nuit," and "La Fete," produced by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1918. Jan. 27. E. B. Hill's orchestral suite "Stevensoniana"
    produced by the Symphony Society, New York City. Walter Damrosch
    conducting.

  1918. Jan. 31. American debut of Hipolito Lazari, Spanish tenor,
    as _The Duke_ in "Rigoletto," at the Metropolitan Opera House,
    New York City.

  1918. Feb. 15. American debut of Mayer Wadler, American violinist,
    in a miscellaneous program, at Acolian Hall, New York City.

  1918. Feb. 15. Production of Leo Sowerby's orchestral suite, "Set
    of Four," by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1918. Feb. 17. A. Chiaffarelli's "Prelude and Fugue" produced by
    the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1918. Feb. 21. Henri Verbrugghen, noted Belgian conductor,
    appeared with the Russian Symphony Orchestra in Carnegie Hall,
    New York City, conducting a Beethoven program.

  1918. Mar. 2. Jeral's "Concerto for Violoncello," with W. Willeke
    as soloist, given by the Russian Symphony Orchestra, at Carnegie
    Hall, New York City.

  1918. Mar. 6. Rimsky-Korsakov's opera "Le Coq d'Or" presented at
    the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Marie
    Sundelius as _Le Coq_, Sophie Braslau, Didur, Diaz, Audisio,
    Ruysdael, and Reschiglian. Monteux conducting.

  1918. Mar. 8. E. Bloch's Symphony in C sharp minor given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City, conducted by the composer.

  1918. Mar. 15. F. Stock's "Overture to a Romantic Comedy" produced
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, conducted by the composer.

  1918. Mar. 23. Tscherepin's folklore "Fire Bird" and "Rhapsodie
    Negre," and John Powell's suite, "The Fair," with the composer
    at the piano, given by the Russian Symphony Orchestra, at
    Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1918. Mar. 23. Henry F. Gilbert's ballet pantomime "The Dance in
    Place Congo" produced at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York
    City. P. Monteux conducting.

  1918. Mar. 23. Charles Wakefield Cadman's opera "Shanewis"
    produced at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with
    Alice Gentle, Kathleen Howard, Marie Sundelius, Paul Althouse,
    and Chalmers. Moranzoni conducting.

  1918. April. Eugene Ysaye, noted Belgian violinist, appointed
    conductor of the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1918. April 26. A. T. Davison's "Tragic Overture" produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra. Ernest Schmidt conducting.

  1918. May. 9. Eugene Ysaye's poem "Exil," for string orchestra
    without basses, produced at the Cincinnati May Festival,
    conducted by the composer.

  1918. May 10. Edgar Stillman Kelley's choral work, "The Pilgrim's
    Progress," produced at the Cincinnati May Festival.

  1918. May 30. David Stanley Smith's oratorio "Rhapsody of St.
    Bernard" produced at the North Shore Festival, Evanston, Ill.,
    under the direction of Peter C. Lutkin.

  1918. June. Ossip Gabrilovitsch, noted pianist, appointed
    conductor of the Detroit Symphony Orchestra.

  1918. June 4. David Stanley Smith's Second Symphony (D major).
    (Played in New York by the Philharmonic Society Dec. 2.) Also G.
    W. Chadwick's "Land of Our Hearts" for chorus and orchestra, and
    Horatio Parker's cantata "Dream of Mary," with Mabel Garrison
    and Carl Formes as soloists, produced at Norfolk, Conn., by the
    Litchfield County Choral Association.

  1918. June 6. C. Villiers Stanford's tone poem "Verdun" given at
    Norfolk, Conn. (and by the Philharmonic Society New York Dec.
    2).

  1918. Oct. 15. First concert in America of "Le Societe des
    Concerts du Conservatoire de Paris," Andre Messager, conductor,
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1918. Oct. 18. A. Hadley's one-act opera "Bianca" produced at the
    Park Theatre, New York City, with Maggie Teyte, Henri Scott,
    Craig Campbell, Howard White, and Carl Formes. (This opera won a
    prize offered by Wm. Hinshaw.)

  1918. Oct. 20. American debut of Alfred Cortot, noted French
    pianist, at a concert of "Le Societe des Concerts du
    Conservatoire de Paris" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New
    York City. He played the Fourth Concerto of Saint-Saens. M.
    Cortot's first recital was given at Aeolian Hall, Nov. 11.

  1918. Nov. 3. American debut of Thelma Given, violinist, at
    Carnegie Hall, New York City. The program included Conus's
    "Concerto in E minor," Kryjenovky's "Russian Romance" (new),
    Achron's "Hebrew Lullaby," and Halverson's "Norwegian Dance"
    (new).

  1918. Nov. 9. Paul Vidal's "Danses Tanagreennes" given by the New
    York Symphony Society, New York City.

  1918. Nov. 11. American debut of B. Cousinou, baritone, in "Samson
    et Delila" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1918. Nov. 13. American debut of G. Crimi, tenor, and Montesanto,
    baritone, in "Aida" at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York
    City.

  1918. Nov. 13. American debut of Raoul Vidas, violinist, in a
    miscellaneous program at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1918. Nov. 14. Production of Edgar Stillman Kelley's song "A
    California Idyll" by the Symphony Society of New York, with
    Mabel Garrison as soloist.

  1918. Nov. 14. Roger-Ducasse's symphonic poem "Sarabande," for
    orchestra and invisible choir, given by the Philharmonic
    Society, New York City, with Mr. Koemmenich's chorus.

  1918. Nov. 15. Operatic debut of Rosa Ponselle, soprano, as _Donna
    Leonora_ in "La Forza del Destino," at the Metropolitan Opera
    House, New York City.

  1918. Nov. 16. Daniel Gregory Mason's "Four Songs--Russians," for
    baritone and orchestra, produced by the Chicago Symphony
    Orchestra, with R. Werrenrath as soloist.

  1918. Nov. 17. David Stanley Smith's suite for orchestra,
    "Impressions," produced by the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra,
    Emil Oberhoffer conducting.

  1918. Nov. 30. Lekeu's "Symphonic Fantasia on Two Popular Angevin
    Tunes" given by the Symphony Society, New York City.

  1918. Dec. 3. Leo Schulz's "American Rhapsody," for violoncello
    and orchestra, produced by the Philharmonic Society, New York
    City, with the composer as soloist.

  1918. Dec. 6. S. Prokofieff's First Concerto (in D flat major)
    for pianoforte and orchestra (with the composer as soloist), and
    his Scythian suite, "Ala and Lilli" (conducted by the composer),
    given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1918. Dec. 7. American debut of Alexandro Dolci, Italian tenor, as
    _Enzo_ in "La Gioconda," with the Chicago Opera Association, at
    the Auditorium, Chicago.

  1918. Dec. 8. A. de Greef's "Four Old Flemish Folk Songs" for
    orchestra, given by the Symphony Society, New York City.

  1918. Dec. 8. Vittore di Sabata's Symphonic Suite, given by the
    New York Symphony Society.

  1918. Dec. 11. First appearance of Nicolai Sokolov as conductor of
    the Cleveland (O.) Symphony Orchestra.

  1918. Dec. 14. World premiere of Puccini's three one-act operas,
    "Il Tabarro," "Gianni Schecchi," and "Suor Angelica," at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Farrar, Muzio,
    Easton, Crimi, de Luca, and Montesanto. Moranzoni conducting.

  1918. Dec. 26. Lili Boulanger's cantata, "Faust et Helene," given
    at a concert of the New York Symphony Society at Carnegie Hall,
    with Julia Claussen as _Helene_, Craig Campbell as _Faust_, and
    Edgar Schofield as _Mephisto_. (Composed at the age of 19, and
    won Grand Prix de Rome. Composer died 1918.)

  1919. Jan. 5. Felix Borowski's "Elegie Symphonique" given by the
    New York Symphony Society at Aeolian Hall, New York City.

  1919. Jan. 14. World premiere of Fevrier's opera "Gismonda" by the
    Chicago Opera Association, with Mary Garden, E. Fontaine,
    Maguenat and Journet. Campanini conducting.

  1919. Jan. 17. Catalani's opera "Loreley" presented by the Chicago
    Opera Association, with Anna Fitziu, Florence Macbeth, A. Dolci,
    V. Lazzari, and C. Rimini. Polacco conducting.

  1919. Jan. 24. Xavier Leroux's opera "La Reine Fiamette" presented
    at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Farrar,
    Lazaro, Rothier and Didur. P. Monteux conducting.

  1919. Jan. 25. Xavier Leroux's opera "Le Chemineau," presented at
    the Auditorium by the Chicago Opera Association, with Yvonne
    Gall, Desire Defrere, Maguenat, Baklanov, and Huberdeau.
    Hasselmans conducting.

  1919. Jan. 26. Humiston's Suite in F sharp minor produced by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City, conducted by the composer.

  1919. Jan. 28. American debut of Leopold Auer, noted Russian
    violinist and teacher, at Aeolian Hall, New York City. He played
    Beethoven's violin sonatas in C minor (Op. 30), G major (Op. 30)
    and A major (Op. 47).

  1919. Jan. 28. S. Rachmaninov's First Pianoforte Concerto given by
    the Russian Symphony Orchestra, New York City, with the composer
    as soloist. M. Altschuler conducting.

  1919. Jan. 30. R. Goldmark's "Requiem" given by the Philharmonic
    Society, New York City.

  1919. Jan. 30. Victor de Sabata's symphonic poem "Juventus" given
    by the Symphony Society, New York City.

  1919. Jan. 31. American operatic debut of Charles Hackett,
    American tenor, at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City,
    as _Count Almaviva_ in "Il Barbiere."

  1919. Jan. 31. Chausson's Symphony in B flat major given by the
    Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1919. Feb. 2. A. Casella's "Films--War Pictures" given by the
    Symphony Society, at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

        1. Belgium--"Heavy Artillery Passing."
        2. France--"Before the Ruins of a Cathedral."
        3. Alsatia--"The Wooden Cross."
        4. Italy--"Man-o'-war Cruising in the Adriatic."

  1919. Feb. 9. G. W. Chadwick's symphonic poem "The Angel of Death"
    produced by the Symphony Society, New York City, at a concert
    given in memory of Theodore Roosevelt.

  1919. Feb. 12. American debut of Winifred Christie, noted English
    pianist, at Aeolian Hall, New York City.

  1919. Feb. 13. O. Respighi's symphonic poem "Fontane di Roma"
    (Fountains of Rome) given by the Philharmonic Society, New York
    City.

  1919. Feb. 14. Felix Borowski's suite from the ballet pantomime
    "Boudour" produced by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra with the
    composer conducting.

  1919. Feb. 17. Stanley R. Avery's overture to "The Taming of the
    Shrew" produced by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1919. Feb. 23. A. Weidig's Concert Overture (Op. 65) produced by
    the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra, conducted by the composer.

  1919. Feb. 28. F. Stock's "March and Hymn to Democracy" produced
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1919. Mar. 2. Elgar's two songs, "Carillon" and "Le Drapeau
    Belge," for orchestra and narrator, given by the Philharmonic
    Society, New York City, with Carlo Liten as narrator.

  1919. Mar. 6. Harold Morris's Tone Poem (from MS.) produced by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1919. Mar. 12. Joseph Breil's opera "The Legend" produced at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Rosa Ponselle,
    Kathleen Howard, Paul Althouse, and L. d'Angelo in the leading
    roles; also J. A. Hugo's opera, "The Temple Dancer" with
    Florence Easton, Carl Schlegel and Morgan Kingston. Moranzoni
    conducting.

  1919. Mar. 14. Rosseter G. Cole's "Pioneer" overture produced by
    the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, conducted by the composer.

  1919. Mar. 17. Vincenzo Tommasini's "Moonlights"; two pieces,
    "Churches and Ruins" and "Serenade," given by the Chicago
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1919. Mar. 24. Griffes's "Three Songs" for soprano and orchestra
    produced by the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra, with Marcia van
    Dresser as soloist.

  1919. Mar. 28. G. Faure's prelude to the opera "Penelope" given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1919. April 4. G. Francesco Malipieri's "Pause del Silenzio"
    (Pauses of Silence) given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra,
    Henri Rabaud conducting.

  1919. April 9. Ildebrando Pizzetti's prelude to Act I of "Fedra"
    (d'Annunzio) given by the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1919. April 11. Alberic Magnard's "Hymn a la Justice" (Op. 14)
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1919. April 11. First concert of the Musicians' New Symphony
    Orchestra of the New York Federation of Musicians, given at
    Carnegie Hall, New York City, Varese conducting. (Organized in
    February.)

  1919. April 18. R. Laparra's poem on four popular verses, "Un
    Dimanche Basque," for orchestra with pianoforte, produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra, with the composer as soloist. P.
    Monteux conducting.

  1919. June. Charles T. Griffes's "The White Peacock" produced at
    the Rivoli Theatre, New York City.

  1919. July 4. Arthur Farwell's "Chant of Victory" produced at the
    Greek Theatre, Berkeley, Cal.

  1919. July 7. Samuel Gardner's tone poem, "New Russia," produced
    at a concert in the Stadium, New York City, conducted by the
    composer.

  1919. Oct. 24. Vincent d'Indy's "Sinfonia Brevis de Bello Gallico"
    (No. 3. Op. 70) given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, P.
    Monteux conducting.

  1919. Oct. 31. V. d'Indy's descriptive symphony, "La Queste de
    Dieu" (The search for God), from the opera "La Legende de
    Saint-Christophe," given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1919. Nov. 7. Michael Dvorsky's tone poem, "Haunted Castle," given
    by the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1919. Nov. 13. Vitaslev Novak's symphonic poem, "In the Tatra
    Mountains" (Op. 26), given by the Philharmonic Society, New York
    City; also B. Roger's dirge, "To the Fallen."

  1919. Nov. 13. Vincent d'Indy's Third Symphony; also Duparc's "Aux
    Etoiles," Debussy's "Berceuse Heroique," and J. Turina's "La
    Procession del Racio," given by the Symphony Society, New York
    City.

  1919. Nov. 16. C. T. Griffes's "Poem, for flute and orchestra,"
    produced by the Symphony Society, New York City, with G. Barrere
    as soloist.

  1919. Nov. 18. Montemezzi's opera "La Nave" presented by the
    Chicago Opera Association, with Rosa Raisa, Lazzari, Dolci, and
    Rimini. The composer conducting.

  1919. Nov. 19. E. DeLamarter's suite from "The Betrothed"
    (Maeterlinck) produced at the Schubert Theatre, New York City,
    Theodore Spiering conducting.

  1919. Nov. 21. Dvo[vr]ak's Third Symphony given by the
    Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1919. Nov. 28. Griffes's symphonic poem "The Pleasure-Dome of
    Kubla Khan" produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, P.
    Monteux conducting.

  1919. Nov. 29. Percy Grainger's children's march, "Over the Hills
    and Far Away," given by the New York Symphony Society, with the
    composer at the Pianoforte. (First performance of the version
    for orchestra.)

  1919. Nov. 29. American debut of Benno Moisevitch, Russian
    pianist, in a recital at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1919. Dec. 5. Albert Chiaffarelli's "Prelude to a Merry Play"
    produced (from MS.) by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1919. Dec. 10. American debut of Madame Besanzoni, mezzo soprano,
    as _Delila_, at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City.

  1919. Dec. 11. Prokofieff's "Classical Symphony" produced by the
    Russian Symphony Orchestra (from MS.) at Carnegie Hall, New York
    City.

  1919. Dec. 19. C. T. Griffes's "Notturno," "The White Peacock,"
    "Clouds," and "Bacchanale" produced by the Philadelphia Symphony
    Orchestra. (N. B. "The White Peacock" had already been given at
    the Rivoli Theatre in June.)

  1919. Dec. 19. Sylvio Lazzari's symphonic picture, "Impressions of
    Night," given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1919. Dec. 23. John Alden Carpenter's ballet, "The Birthday of the
    Infanta," produced by the Chicago Opera Association.

  1919. Dec. 27. Albert Wolff's opera "The Blue Bird" (Maeterlinck)
    presented at the Metropolitan Opera House. New York City,
    conducted by the composer. (Maeterlinck also present.)

  1919. Dec. 28. American debut of Madame Wurmser-Delcourt, harpist,
    at a concert of the Symphony Society, New York City. (She
    played, for the first time in America, the harp chromatique.)

  1920. Jan. 2. Reginald de Koven's opera "Rip van Winkle" produced
    by the Chicago Opera Association, with E. Herbert, E. Darch,
    Baklanov, Dufranne, Cotreuil and Huberdeau. A. Smallens
    conducting.

  1920. Jan. 2. Debussy's dance poem "Jeux" given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1920. Jan. 2. Fibich's overture to the merry play, "A Night at
    Karluv-Tyn," given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1920. Jan. 5. Ravel's opera "L'Heure Espagnol" presented by the
    Chicago Opera Association with Y. Gall, D. Defrere, Maguenat,
    Cotreuil and Warnery. Hasselmans conducting.

  1920. Jan. 17. Leoncavallo's opera "Zaza" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Farrar, K. Howard,
    Crimi and Amato.

  1920. Jan. 19. Andre Messager's opera "Madame Chrysantheme"
    presented by the Chicago Opera Association with Miura, Fontaine,
    Dufranne and Warnery. Hasselmans conducting.

  1920. Jan. 21. American debut of Carlos Valderranea, Peruvian
    pianist, in a program of Inca music, at Carnegie Hall, New York
    City.

  1920. Jan. 23. Kalinnikov's symphonic poem, "The Fir Tree and the
    Palm," given by the Philharmonic Society, New York City.

  1920. Jan. 30. F. Converse's Symphony in C minor given by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra, P. Monteux conducting.

  1920. Jan. 31. Arthur Hadley's opera in two acts, "Cleopatra's
    Night," produced at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City,
    with Frances Alda, Jeanne Gordon, Marie Tiffany, Orville Harold,
    V. Reschiglian, M. Picco and L. d'Angelo. Gennaro Papi
    conducting.

  1920. Feb. 1. Louis Aubert's "Habanera" given by the New York
    Symphony Society at Aeolian Hall, New York City.

  1920. Feb. 6. Hugo Riesenfeld's "Overture in Romantic Style"
    produced by the Philharmonic Society, New York City, conducted
    by the composer.

  1920. Feb. 6. Rachmaninov's third symphony, "The Bells," for
    soprano, tenor, bass and chorus, with orchestra, given by the
    Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra with Florence Hinkle, Arthur
    Hackett, F. Patten, and a chorus trained by Stephen Townsend.

  1920. Feb. 13. Elgar's variations, "Enigma," given by the
    Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1920. Mar. 3. American debut of Sascha Culbertson, violinist, at
    Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1920. Mar. 5. Leo Sowerby's Pianoforte Concerto in F major given
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra with the composer as soloist.
    (N. B. As originally arranged, for voice and orchestra, it was
    given at a concert at Orchestra Hall, Jan. 18, 1917.)

  1920. Mar. 19. A. Brune's symphonic poem, "A Fairy Tale," produced
    by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1920. April 2. Eric De Lamarter's Concerto in E major for organ,
    produced by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, with the composer as
    soloist.

  1920. April 16. Debussy's "Fantasy" for pianoforte and orchestra
    given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, with Alfred Cortot as
    soloist.

  1920. May 25. Felix Borowski's poeme "Le Printemps Passionne"
    produced at the North Shore Festival, Evanston, Ill., conducted
    by the composer.

  1920. Aug. 23. Charles Wakefield Cadman's Indian music-drama, "The
    Sunset Trail," produced by the California Theatre Ensemble at
    San Diego, Cal., under Dr. H. J. Stewart.

  1920. Oct. 3. American debut of Michel Piastro, Russian violinist,
    at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1920. Oct. Production of Mortimer Wilson's overture "New Orleans"
    at the Rialto Theatre, New York City, conducted by the composer.
    (This work won a prize of $500 offered by Hugo Riesenfeld.)

  1920. Oct. 16. American debut of Josef Stopak, violinist, in a
    recital at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1920. Oct. 22. G. Ropartz's "Divertissement" for orchestra given
    by the Boston Symphony Orchestra. P. Monteux conducting.

  1920. Oct. 22. E. Goossens's "By the Tarn," for string orchestra
    and clarinet, given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1920. Oct. 25. American debut of Michel Gusikov, Russian
    violinist, in a recital at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1920. Oct. 29. A. Bax's "The Garden of Fand" produced by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra. F. Stock conducting.

  1920. Oct. 29. E. B. Hill's poem for orchestra, "The Fall of the
    House of Usher," produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra. P.
    Monteux conducting.

  1920. Nov. 2. American debut of Duci Karekjarto, Jugo-Slavian
    violinist, in a recital at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1920. Nov. 5. American debut of Cyril Scott, English composer and
    pianist, in a concert with the Philadelphia Orchestra. He played
    his "Concerto in C," and conducted his "Two Passacaglias."

  1920. Nov. 5. Sabata's symphonic poem "Juventus" given by the
    Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1920. Nov. 5. First performance of the orchestral version of
    Ernest Bloch's "Suite for Viola and Orchestra" (or pianoforte)
    given by the National Symphony Orchestra at Carnegie Hall, New
    York City, with Mr. Bailly as soloist. (This work was produced,
    with piano, at the Berkshire Festival of Chamber Music,
    Pittsfield, Mass., on Sept. 25, 1919.)

  1920. Nov. 12. Gustav Strube's "Four Preludes for Orchestra"
    produced by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  1920. Nov. 17. Premiere of Marinuzzi's opera "Jacquerie" by the
    Chicago Opera Association, with Yvonne Gall, Olga Carrara, L.
    Olivieri, Desire Defrere, Vitto Trevisan, A. Paillard, S. Civai
    and T. Dentale. Conducted by the composer.

  1920. Nov. 19. Albert Dupuis's symphonic fragments "Jean Michel"
    given by the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1920. Nov. 21. J. Albeniz's rhapsody "A Night in Seville" given by
    the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra.

  1920. Nov. 21. American debut of the Hungarian pianist,
    Nyredghasi, in Chaikovsky's pianoforte concerto in B flat, with
    the National Symphony Orchestra, at the Lexington Theatre, New
    York City.

  1920. Nov. 22. American debut of Vasa Prihoda, Czecho-Slovak
    violinist, in a recital at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1920. Nov. 26. Alfven's Second Symphony given by the Philharmonic
    Society, New York City.

  1920. Nov. 23. J. A. Carpenter's "A Pilgrim Vision," written to
    celebrate the tercentenary of the landing of the "Mayflower"
    Pilgrims, produced by the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1920. Nov. 29. American debut of Daisy Kennedy (Mrs. Benno
    Moisevitch), Australian violinist, at Aeolian Hall, New York
    City.

  1920. Dec. 2. Riccardo Pick-Mangialli's symphonic comedy "Il
    Carillon Magico" presented at the Metropolitan Opera House, New
    York City.

  1920. Dec. 5. First concert of the newly organized Civic Music
    Students' Orchestra, in Orchestral Hall, Chicago, Ill.

  1920. Dec. 5. Alfredo Casella's "The Venetian Convent" given by
    the New York Symphony Orchestra, at the Academy of Music, New
    York City.

  1920. Dec. 12. Edward F. Kurtz's march "Victory" given at a
    popular concert by the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.

  1920. Dec. 13. Leoncavallo's posthumous opera "Edipo Re" produced
    by the Chicago Opera Association, with Titta Ruffo and Dorothy
    Francis in the leading parts. Marinuzzi conducting.

  1920. Dec. 14. Samuel Gardner's Violin Concerto produced by the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra at Providence, R. I., with the
    composer as soloist.

  1920. Dec. 23. Revival of Verdi's opera "Don Carlos" at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Rosa Ponselle,
    Matzenauer, Martinelli, de Luca, and Didur.

  1920. Dec. 23. G. Francesco Malipiero's "Impressioni dal Vero."
    Part 1, "Il Capinero" (The Blackcap), Part 2, "Il Picchio" (The
    Woodpecker), Part 3, "Il Chiu" (The Owl), given by the Boston
    Symphony Orchestra.

  1920. Dec. 29. Revival of Gay's "The Beggar's Opera" (the first
    ballad opera performed in America) at the Greenwich Village
    Theatre, New York City, with Sylvia Nelis as _Polly Peachum_.

  1920. Dec. 30. Ralph Vaughan Williams's "A London Symphony" given
    by the New York Symphony Society, when Albert Coates (noted
    English conductor) made his American debut as conductor.

  1920. Dec. 30. First Concert of Toscanini's "La Scala" Orchestra,
    at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1920. Dec. 31. Gustav Holst's symphony, "The Planets," given by
    the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1920. Dec. Adolph Tandler appointed conductor of the Los Angeles
    (Cal.) Symphony Orchestra.

  1921. Jan. 9. American debut of Selma Kurtz, Viennese soprano, in
    a concert at the Hippodrome, New York City, in a miscellaneous
    program.

  1921. Jan. 13. Mary Garden appointed artistic director of the
    Chicago Opera Association.

  1921. Jan. 13. Production, from MS., of Josef Stransky's two songs
    for voice and orchestra, "Thy Fragrant Hair," and "Hymnus," by
    the Philharmonic Orchestra, New York City, with Margarete
    Matzenauer as soloist.

  1921. Jan. 14. American debut of Ignaz Friedman, pianist, in a
    recital at Aeolian Hall, New York City.

  1921. Jan. 14. Francesca Malipiero's "Grottesco," for small
    orchestra, given by the National Symphony Orchestra, New York
    City. A. Bodansky conducting.

  1921. Jan. 14. American debut of Alexander Schmuller, Russian
    violinist, in a recital at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1921. Jan. 17. American debut of Izzy Mitnisky, Russian violinist,
    in a recital at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1921. Jan. 19. American debut of Daisy Jean, Belgian
    violoncellist, in a recital at Aeolian Hall, New York City.

  1921. Jan. 19. Frank Bridge's Suite for String Orchestra, and
    Debussy's "Jet d'Eau" for voice and orchestra, given by the
    Boston Musical Association, in Jordan Hall.

  1921. Feb. 2. National Symphony Orchestra of New York merged with
    the Philharmonic Orchestra, under Josef Stransky.

  1921. Feb. 2. American debut of Erika Morini, Austro-Italian
    violinist, in a recital at Carnegie Hall, New York City,
    supported by an orchestra under Bodansky. She played the
    Mendelssohn concerto and one by Vieuxtemps.

  1921. Feb. 3. Respighi's "Suite of Four Songs and Dances of the
    Sixteenth Century" for the lute (transcribed for orchestra)
    given by the Symphony Society, New York City.

  1921. Feb. 4. Granville Bantock's prelude to "Sappho" given by the
    Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra.

  1921. Feb. 6. Pietro Yon's "Concerto Gregoriano" for organ and
    orchestra given by the Symphony Society, New York City. (Had
    been previously played by the composer as an organ piece at
    Wanamaker's, and in Chicago.)

  1921. Feb. 12. R. Strauss's orchestral suite from "Der Buerger als
    Edelman" (opera based on Moliere's play "Le Bourgeois
    Gentilhomme") given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, with
    Alfred de Voto at the pianoforte.

  1921. Feb. 14. American debut of Paul Kochanski, Russian
    violinist, at Carnegie Hall, New York City, in Brahms's concerto
    in D. Walter Damrosch conducting.

  1921. Feb. 16. A. Bruneau's symphonic poem "Penthesilee," for
    voice and orchestra; V. Davico's "Impressionna Romana" from MS.,
    and M. Ravel's "Alborada del Gracioso," also from MS., given by
    the Boston Musical Association in Jordan Hall. Georges Longy,
    conductor.

  1921. Feb. 17. Debussy's Two Nocturnes for pianoforte and
    orchestra, and a "Fantasy," given by the Symphony Society, New
    York City, with Alfred Cortot at the pianoforte.

  1921. Feb. 22. American debut of Carlo Sabatini at Carnegie Hall,
    New York City, in a miscellaneous program including the Bruch
    concerto in G minor and Beethoven's "Kreutzer Sonata."

  1921. Mar. 4. Production of H. F. Gilbert's orchestral suite
    "Indian Sketches" by the Boston Symphony Orchestra. P. Monteux
    conducting.

  1921. Mar. 4. Daniel Gregory Mason's Prelude and Fugue for
    pianoforte and orchestra given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra
    with John Powell, pianist.

  1921. Mar. 4. Victor Vreuil's symphonic poem "Jour de Fete" given
    by the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, E. Ysaye conducting.

  1921. Mar. 4. Production from MS. of Reginald Sweet's overture to
    the one-act opera "Riders to the Sea" by the Philharmonic
    Orchestra, New York City.

  1921. Mar. 5. Emanuel Moor's Concerto for string quartet and
    orchestra given by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1921. Mar. 9. Karl Weiss's opera "The Polish Jew" presented at the
    Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, with Emile Capoulican,
    Kathleen Howard, Raymonde Delaunais, Mario Chamlee, Angelo Bada,
    R. Leonhardt, William Gustafson, L. d'Angelo and Paolo Ananian.
    Conducted by A. Bodansky.

  1921. Mar. 11. Kurt Atterbury's First Symphony (F major) given by
    the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra.

  1921. April 27. Florent Schmitt's "Chant de Guerre" given for the
    first time in America with orchestra, by the Boston Musical
    Association, assisted by the Harvard Glee Club; also Charles
    Bordes's "Rhapsodie Basque" for pianoforte and orchestra, with
    Miss Marion Carley, pianist.

  1921. May 26. F. Stock's choral work, "A Psalmodic Rhapsody,"
    produced at the North Shore Festival, Evanston, Ill., conducted
    by the composer.

  1921. June 7. Production of Paolo Gallico's prize oratorio, "The
    Apocalypse," in the gymnasium of Augustana College, Rock Island,
    Ill., at the Biennial Convention of the National Federation of
    Music Clubs.

  1921. July 20. Production of music by Edgar Stillman Kelley, F. S.
    Converse, George W. Chadwick, Arthur Foote, John Powell, E. B.
    Hill, Leo Sowerby, Chalmers Clifton, and Henry F. Gilbert, at
    the pageant given at Plymouth, Mass., to celebrate the
    tercentenary of the Pilgrims' landing.

  1921. Oct. 14. Walter Braunfels's "Fantastic Variations on a Theme
    of Berlioz," given by the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1921. Oct. 14. American debut of Emil Telmanyi, Hungarian
    violinist, in Lalo's "Symphony Espagnole," with the Philadelphia
    Orchestra.

  1921. Oct. 15. American debut of Elly Ney, noted French pianist,
    in a recital of Beethoven's works at Carnegie Hall, New York
    City. She appeared with the Philharmonic Orchestra Nov. 26, and
    played Chaikovsky's "First Concerto."

  1921. Oct. 21. Cesar Franck's Organ Chorale No. 2, B minor,
    arranged for orchestra and organ by Wallace Goodrich, given by
    the Boston Symphony Orchestra with Wallace Goodrich as soloist.

  1921. Oct. 21. Jan Sibelius's "Fifth Symphony" (E flat) given by
    the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.

  1921. Oct. 23. Production of Louis T. Gruenberg's symphonic poem
    "The Hill of Dreams" by the Symphony Society, New York City, at
    Aeolian Hall. (This work won the prize offered in 1920 by Harry
    Harkins Flagler.)

  1921. Oct. 28. Ravel's "La Valse" given by the San Francisco
    Symphony Orchestra, under Alfred Hertz.

  1921. Nov. 4. Gregor Fitelberg's "Polish Rhapsody" given by the
    Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra. (This work in its original
    form, won the $1000 prize offered by Mrs. F. S. Coolidge in
    1919, and was played at the Berkshire Festival of Chamber Music
    at Pittsfield, Mass., in September of that year.)

  1921. Nov. 6. Rudolf Ganz formally welcomed as conductor of the
    St. Louis Symphony Orchestra.

  1921. Nov. 13. H. H. Wetzler's overture to "As You Like It," given
    by the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra.

  1921. Nov. 14. American debut of Beniamino Gigli, Italian tenor,
    as _Alfredo_ in "La Traviata," at the Metropolitan Opera House,
    New York City.

  1921. Nov. 15. American debut of Tino Pattiera, Italian tenor, as
    _Mario_ in "La Tosca" with the Chicago Opera Association.

  1921. Nov. 16. Operatic debut of Edith Mason as _Cio-Cio-San_ in
    "Madama Butterfly," with the Chicago Opera Association.

  1921. Nov. 17. Production of H. K. Hadley's tone poem "The Ocean"
    by the Philharmonic Orchestra, New York City, conducted by the
    composer.

  1921. Nov. 19. Erich W. Korngold's opera, "Die Tote Stadt,"
    presented at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York City, on
    which occasion Marie Jeritza, noted Moravian soprano, made her
    American debut. Bodansky conducting.

  1921. Nov. 28. American debut (as pianist) of Alfredo Casella,
    noted Italian composer, at a recital in the Town Hall, New York
    City.

  1921. Nov. 29. American operatic debut of Claire Dux, soprano, as
    _Mimi_ in "La Boheme," with the Chicago Opera Association.

  1921. Dec. 16. Production of Serge Prokofiev's "Classical
    Symphony" (D major) by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra with the
    composer as pianist.

  1921. Dec. 23. Production of the music of John Alden Carpenter's
    jazz pantomime, "Krazy Kat," by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  1921. Dec. 25. American debut of Artur Schnabel, German pianist,
    in a recital at Carnegie Hall, New York City.

  1921. Dec. 30. Production of S. Prokofiev's satirical opera, "Love
    for Three Oranges," by the Chicago Opera Association.

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 1: Said to have been played at the World's Fair, Chicago,
under Theodore Thomas in a series of concerts of Russian music from June
5-13th, 1893.]




  TEXT            ERRATA                                       INDEX
  PAGE                                                          PAGE

    4. 1742. For Fingstude read Singstunde.                     295.

   28. 1841. Mar. 31. read 1853. Jan. 11.                       363.

   33. 1848. Jan. 8. omit "Pastoral."                           197.

   47. 1857. Nov. 19. read 1859. Nov. 19. and                   275.
       "Prelude" for "Overture."

    "  1857. Nov. 21. read 1856. April 27. at a concert         263.
       given by Carl Bergmann, New York.

   48. 1858. Nov. 28. Insert, Gade's Fifth Symphony             221.
       given by the Philharmonic Society, New
       York.

    "  1859. April 30. read April 20.                           238.

   49. 1860. Mar. 3. for Mendelssohn read Beethoven.            243.

    "  1860. Mar. 3. read Dec. 22. Liszt's Fest-Klaenge.         238.

   50. 1861, Jan. 9. read 1869. Jan. 9.                          "

    "  1862. Feb. Insert Brahms's First Serenade                202.
       given by the Philharmonic Society, New York.

   53. 1865. Nov. 11. read Nov. 4.                              238.

    "  1866. Mar. 12. read 1859 Jan, 8. by the Philharmonic     262.
       Society, New York.

   57. 1869. Feb. 6. read 1868. May 9. at Triennial             243.
       Festival, Boston.

   58. 1870. May 7. read 1855. Mar. 10. by the Philharmonic     275.
       Society, New York.

    "  1871. Jan. 5. read 1870. Feb. 5. by the Philharmonic     224.
       Society, New York.

   63. 1874. Clara Louise Kellogg, third line--read             286.
       1861.

   82. 1884. Feb. 9. for Liszt read Bizet.                      238.

   88. 1887. Jan. 19. read Feb. 19.                             259.

   89. 1887. Feb. 19. read 1883. Nov. 10. by the                240.
       Philharmonic Society, New York.

   89. 1887. May 8. Insert, Sir Arthur Sullivan's               271.
       oratorio, "The Golden Legend," given by the
       Boston Oratorio Society, conducted by Frederick
       Archer, at Music Hall, Boston.

  101. 1891. April 15. add--produced as an opera                242.
       in New Orleans, 1893. Feb. 10.

  104. 1891. Dec. 31. read 1878. Dec. 21. by Philharmonic       208.
       Society, New York.

  104. 1893. Mar. 7. read 1884. Feb. 3, by the                  274.
       Boston Symphony Orchestra.

  106. 1894. April. Insert, Edgar Stillman Kelley's             234.
       "Aladdin" and "A Chinese Suite for Orchestra,"
       San Francisco, Cal.

  108. 1895. Mar. 23. read "Hans Heiling" played                241.
       1856, April 19, by the Philharmonic Society,
       New York.

  114. 1898. Feb. 5. read Nov. 12. Philharmonic                 208.
       Society, New York.

  115. 1899. Jan. 17. omit "first full performance".            210.

  123. 1900. Dec. 1. read 1890. April 23. Brahms's              202.
       First Pianoforte Concerto given at Steinway
       Hall, New York, by Conrad Ansorge, assisted
       by part of the Th. Thomas Orchestra.

  124. 1901. Mar. 15. omit "In London Town."                    217.

  125. 1901. Nov. 22. omit "March."                             271.

  127. 1902. Nov. 29. omit (Same as 1901. Nov. 22.)             271.

  128. First line--Berlioz's overture, "Les Francs              199.
       Juges," was given in 1846, in New York.

  132. 1904. Mar. 23. Insert, Glazunof's symphonic              223.
       poem "Stenka Razin" given at a Chickering
       concert in Boston under B. J. Lang.

  133. 1904. Oct. 22. read 1899. Jan. 13. by the                215.
       Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

  136. 1905. Dec. 4. add Chausson's Symphony in                 209.
       B flat.

  139. 1906. Nov. 12. omit--(see Oct. 15.)                      251.

  141. 1907. Mar. 16. for Moskowsky read S.                     245.
       Noskowski.

  142. 1907. Oct. 19. read Oct. 18. by Chicago Symphony         233.
       Orchestra.

  143. 1907. Dec. 21. for Bassi read Bossi.                     202.




INDEX OF COMPOSITIONS


ABERT, J. J.
  1866. Oct. 27. First Symphony. New York, N. Y.

ADAM, A. C.
  1839. "Le Postillon de Longjumeau," opera. New York, N. Y.
  1858-9. "Chalet." New Orleans, La.
  1858-9. "Si j'etais Roi." New Orleans, La.

AKIMENKO, TH.
  1904. Feb. 27. Lyric Poem. Boston, Mass.

ALBENIZ, P.
  1920. Nov. 21. "A Night in Seville," rhapsody. St. Louis, Mo.

ALFVEN, H.
  1914. Nov. 6. Third Symphony (E minor). Minneapolis, Minn.
  1914. Dec. 13. Festspel Polonaise. Minneapolis, Minn.
  1920. Nov. 26. Second Symphony (D). New York, N. Y.

d'AMBROSIO.
  1905. Jan. 7. Quatre Pieces d'Orchestre. Boston, Mass.
  1907. Dec. 21. Violin Concerto (B minor). Boston, Mass.

ARBOS, E. F.
  1903. Oct. 24. "Tango," Morceau de Concert. Boston, Mass.
  1913. Nov. 28. "Guajiras" for violin and orchestra. Philadelphia, Pa.

ARENS, F. X.
  1900. Dec. 10. "Salve Regina." New York, N. Y.

ARENSKY, A. S.
  1899. Oct. 14. Pianoforte Concerto (F minor). Boston, Mass.
  1903. Jan. 4. Introduction to "Nala and Damayanti." Boston, Mass.
  1904. Mar. 3. Variations on an Original Theme. New York, N. Y.
  1905. Feb. 25. "Silhouettes," suite. New York, N. Y.
  1905. Dec. 30. Violin Concerto (Op. 54). New York, N. Y.
  1907. Dec. 20. First Symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Nov. 18. Variations for Strings. New York, N. Y.
  1913. Jan. 16. Serenade. New York, N. Y.

ARNE, DR. T. A.
  1757. Masque of Alfred. Philadelphia, Pa.

ARNOLD, M.
  1895. Feb. 28. American Plantation Dances. New York, N. Y.

ATTERBURY, K.
  1921. Mar. 11. First Symphony (F Major). Minneapolis, Minn.

AUBER, D. F. E.
  1829. Nov. 7. "Masaniello," opera. New York, N. Y.
  1833. June 20. "Fra Diavolo," opera. New York, N. Y.
  1843. May 25. "L'Ambassadrice," opera. New York, N. Y.
  1843. June 17. "Le Domino Noir," opera. New York, N. Y.
  1843. July 5. "Pre aux Clerc," opera. New York, N. Y.
  1858-9. "Diamans de Couronne," opera. New Orleans, La.
  1862. Sept. 18. Grand Inauguration March. New York, N. Y.
  1895. April 13. "L'Enfant Prodigue," overture. Boston, Mass.

AUBERT, L.
  1913. Mar. 8. "La Foret Bleue," opera. Boston, Mass.
  1920. Feb. 1. "Habanera" opera. New York, N. Y.

AVERY, S. R.
  1919. Feb. 17. "Taming of the Shrew," overture. Chicago, Ill.

BACH, C. P. E.
  1862. Sept. 18. Symphony in D major. New York, N. Y.
  1866. Jan. 13. Symphony in C. New York, N. Y.
  1908. April 11. Symphony in E flat. Boston, Mass.

BACH, J. S.
  1865. Jan. 13. Toccata in F. New York, N. Y.
  1865. April 8. Passacaglia. New York, N. Y.
  1867. Oct. 7. Third Suite (in D). New York, N. Y.
  1874. May 8. St. Matthew Passion, in part. Boston, Mass.
  1874. Nov. 27. Suite in B minor. New York, N. Y.
  1874. Dec. 12. Ciaconna in D minor. New York, N. Y.
  1876. Nov. 25. Suite in C. New York, N. Y.
  1877. Dec. 23. Christmas Oratorio (Parts I and II). Boston, Mass.
  1879. April 11. St. Matthew Passion (complete). Boston, Mass.
  1883. April 2. Christmas Oratorio (Part VI). Boston, Mass.
  1884. Nov. 22. Christmas Oratorio (Pastoral). Boston, Mass.
  1885. Jan. 31. Three Sonata Movements for Orchestra. Boston, Mass.
  1900. Mass in B minor. Bethlehem, Pa.
  1901. Dec. 28. Concerto (F major). Boston, Mass.
  1902. Dec. 6. Concerto for Violin (A minor). Boston, Mass.
  1904. Dec. 3. Second Violin Concerto (E major). Boston, Mass.
  1907. Mar. 9. Brandenburg Concerto (G). Boston, Mass.

BALAKIREF, M. A.
  1891. April 29. "Islamay," orchestral fantasia. Boston, Mass.
  1893. June 6. Overture on Russian Themes. Chicago, Ill.
  1896. Oct. 23. "Tamara," symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1908. Jan. 21. "En Boheme," symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1908. Mar. 14. Symphony in C major. Boston, Mass.
  1910. April 19. Overture. Boston, Mass.
  1911. Nov. 25. Overture on Theme of a Spanish March. Boston, Mass.

BALFE, M. W.
  1844. Nov. 25. "The Bohemian Girl," opera. New York, N. Y.

BALLANTINE, E.
  1917. Jan. 19. "The Eve of St. Agnes," symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.

BANTOCK, G.
  1909. Oct. 23. "The Pierrot of the Minute." Boston, Mass.
  1910. Mar. 6. "Fine Old English Tunes." New York, N. Y.
  1910. Sept. 29. "Omar Khayyam" (first part). Worcester, Mass.
  1910. Dec. 1. "Omar Khayyam" (complete). Boston, Mass.
  1911. Oct. 28. "Dante and Beatrice" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1913. April 17. "Atalanta" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Feb. 4. "Sappho," prelude to. Minneapolis, Minn.

BARGIEL, W.
  1866. Jan. 13. Symphony in C. New York, N. Y.

BARNARD, F.
  1886. Jan. 9. Violin Concerto (G major). Boston, Mass.

BARNETT, J. F.
  1869. Feb. 11. "The Ancient Mariner" cantata. Roxbury, Mass.

BAYER, J.
  1890. Jan. 4. "Die Puppensee" ballet. New York, N. Y.

BAX, A.
  1920. Oct. 29. "The Garden of Fand." Chicago, Ill.

BEACH, MRS. H. H. A.
  1896. April 7. Pianoforte Concerto (C sharp minor). Boston, Mass.
  1896. Oct. 31. "Gallic Symphony" (E minor). Boston, Mass.

BECHER, WM.
  1912. Nov. 8. Pianoforte Concerto. New York, N. Y.

BECKER, G.
  1900. April 27. "Scenes Luxembourgeoises." Boston, Mass.

BEETHOVEN, L. van
  1821. April 24. First Symphony (C). Philadelphia, Pa.
  1839. Sept. 9. "Fidelio" opera (in English). New York, N. Y.
  1840. Fifth Symphony. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1842. Jan. 15. Sixth Symphony "Pastoral" (F). Boston, Mass.
  1842. Nov. 12. Second Symphony (D). Boston, Mass.
  1843. Feb. 15. Third Symphony "Eroica" (E flat). New York, N. Y.
  1844. Nov. 16. Eighth Symphony (F). New York, N. Y.
  1844. Nov. 16. "Egmont" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1844. Dec. 14. "Wellington Symphony." New York, N. Y.
  1846. May 20. Ninth Symphony "Choral" (D minor). New York, N. Y.
  1848. Jan. 8. Seventh Symphony. Boston, Mass.
  1849. Nov. 24. Fourth Symphony (B flat). New York, N. Y.
  1850. Jan. 19. Third Pianoforte Concerto (C minor). Boston, Mass.
  1850. Dec. 7. "Leonore" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1853. Nov. 22. Violin Concerto (first movement). Boston, Mass.
  1854. Feb. 4. Fourth Pianoforte Concerto (G). Boston, Mass.
  1854. Mar. 4. Fifth Pianoforte Concerto (E flat). Boston, Mass.
  1856. Dec. 29. "Fidelio" opera (in German). New York, N. Y.
  1859. Mar. 26. "Egmont" music. Boston, Mass.
  1860. Mar. 3. "Die Weihe des Hauses" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1865. Feb. 18. Second Pianoforte Concerto (B Flat). New York, N. Y.
  1865. Feb. 18. Triple Concerto. New York, N. Y.
  1866. Jan. 13. Choral Fantasia. New York, N. Y.
  1866. Dec. 2. Overture in C. New York, N. Y.
  1867. Dec. 15. "Prometheus" music. New York, N. Y.
  1869-1874. Mass in D. New York, N. Y.
  1884. April 4. Grand Quatuor. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Jan. 15. Twelve Dances. New York, N. Y.
  1912. Dec. 29. "Jena Symphony." Boston, Mass.
  1915. Jan. 30. "Fidelio" (revival). New York, N. Y.

BELLINI, V.
  1832. Dec. 5. "Il Pirata" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1833-4. "La Straniera" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1835. Nov. 13. "La Sonnambula" (in English). New York, N. Y.
  1840. "Norma" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1844. Feb. 2. "I Puritani" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1844. Mar. 18. "Beatrice di Finda" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1848. Feb. 1. "I Capuletti e Montecchi" opera. New York, N. Y.

BEMBERG, H.
  1894. Dec. 17. "Elaine" opera. New York, N. Y.

BENDIX, V.
  1907. April 27. Fourth Symphony (D minor). Boston, Mass.

BENNETT, W. S.
  1845. Mar. 1. "The Naiads" (Die Najaden), overture. New York, N. Y.
  1848. Dec. 2. "The Woodnymph" (Die Waldnymphe), overture. New York,
    N. Y.
  1873. Nov. 6. Concerto in E. Boston, Mass.
  1875. April 24. "Paradise and the Peri" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1875. Sept. 7. Symphony in G minor. New York, N. Y.

BENOIT, P.
  1894. Nov. 17. Symphonic Poem. Boston, Mass.

BERGER, W.
  1899. Nov 4. Symphony in B flat major. Boston, Mass.

BERLIOZ, H.
  1846. "Les Francs Juges" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1846. Nov. 21. "King Lear" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1857. Jan. 24. "Roman Carnival" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1863. Mar. 7. "Corsair" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1863. May 9. "Harold in Italy" symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1864. Dec. 3. "Romeo et Juliette" (second part) dramatic symphony. New
    York, N. Y.
  1866. Jan. 27. "Fantastic Symphony." New York, N. Y.
  1867. Jan. 19. "Romeo et Juliette" overture. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1867. Nov. 9. "Benvenuto Cellini" overture. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1880. Feb. 12. "Damnation de Faust." New York, N. Y.
  1882. April 6. "Requiem." New York, N. Y.
  1882. May 6. "Les Troyens" (second act). New York, N. Y.
  1884. Mar. 7. "The Childhood of Christ" (selections). New York, N. Y.
  1885. Feb. 5. "Tristia." New York, N. Y.
  1887. Feb. 26. "Les Troyens" (complete). New York, N. Y.
  1891. May 5. "Te Deum." New York, N. Y.
  1891. Nov. 29. "The Fifth of May." Boston, Mass.
  1900. Nov. 2. "Rob Roy" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1903. April 15. "Marche Funebre" from "Hamlet." Boston, Mass.

BERNARD, E.
  1886. Jan. 9. Violin Concerto in G major. Boston, Mass.

BERWALD, W.
  1910. Jan. 14. Dramatic Overture. Syracuse, N. Y.
  1912. May 16. "Walthari" overture. Syracuse, N. Y.
  1914. April 5. "The Seven Last Words of Christ" cantata. New York,
    N. Y.

BINGHAM, S.
  1916. Feb. 6. Suite for Orchestra. New York, N. Y.

BIRD, A.
  1886. Nov. 5. First Symphony (A). New York, N. Y.
  1887. April 23. Carnival Scene. New York, N. Y.
  1893. June 12. Third Suite. Chicago, Ill.

BISCHOFF, H.
  1908. Jan. 14. Symphony (E major). Boston, Mass.

BISHOP, SIR H.
  1823. "Clari" ballad opera. New York, N. Y.

BIZET, G.
  1878. Oct. 23. "Carmen" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1881. April 2. "Arlesienne" suite. Boston, Mass.
  1882. Feb. 18. "La Patrie" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1884. Feb. 9. "Roma" third suite. Boston, Mass.
  1893. Aug. "The Pearl Fishers" (in English). Philadelphia, Pa.
  1896. Jan. 11. "Les Pecheurs des Perles" (2 acts). New York, N. Y.
  1916. Nov. 13. "Les Pecheurs des Perles" opera (complete). New York,
    N. Y.

BLECH, L.
  1911. Jan. 20. "Versiegelt" opera. New York, N. Y.

BLOCH, E.
  1916. Oct. 16. Two poems, "Winter" and "Spring." New York, N. Y.
  1917. Mar. 23. The first of "Trois Poemes Juifs," Boston, Mass.
  1917. May 3. "Two Psalms." New York, N. Y.
  1918. Jan. 10. "Trois Poemes Juifs" (complete). New York, N. Y.
  1918. Mar. 8. Symphony in C sharp minor. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Nov. 5. Suite for Viola and Orchestra. New York, N. Y.

BLOCKX, J.
  1903. Jan. 7. "Danse Flamande." Boston, Mass.
  1909. Mar. 10. "Princesse Auberge" opera. New York, N. Y.

BOEHE, E.
  1904. Nov. 11. "Wanderings of Odysseus." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1906. Mar. 3. First four "Episodes." Boston, Mass.
  1907. Nov. 30. "Taormina" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.

BOELLMAN, L.
  1902. Nov. 14. Variations Symphoniques. Chicago, Ill.

BOITO, A.
  1880. Oct. 24. "Mefistofele" opera. New York, N. Y.

BOIELDIEU, F. A.
  1827. Sept. 28. "Jean de Paris" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1827. Oct. "The Caliph of Bagdad" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1831. May. "La Dame Blanche" opera. New York, N. Y.

BORDES, CHARLES
  1921. April 27. "Rhapsodie Basque." Boston, Mass.

BORDIER, J.
  1905. Jan. 4. Meditation. Boston, Mass.

BORNSCHEIN, F. C.
  1916. April 25. "Onawa" cantata. Paterson, N. J.

BORODIN, A.
  1886. Mar. 23. "On the Steppes of Central Asia." Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1890. Jan. 4. First Symphony (A flat). Boston, Mass.
  1892. Feb. 27. "A Prairie Scene." Boston, Mass.
  1912. Dec. 14. Second Symphony (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1915. Dec. 30. "Prince Igor" opera. New York, N. Y.

BOROWSKI, F.
  1918. Jan. 25. "Peintures Portrait d'une Jeune Fille." Chicago, Ill.
  1919. Jan. 5. "Elegie Symphonique." New York, N. Y.
  1919. Feb. 14. Suite from "Boudour." Chicago, Ill.
  1920. May 25. "Le Printemps Passionne." Evanston, Ill.

BORTKIEVITCH, S. E.
  1915. Feb. 13. Pianoforte Concerto in B flat. New York, N. Y.

BOSSI, E.
  1907. Dec. 21. Goldonian Intermezzo from Suite Variee (Op. 27).
    Boston, Mass.
  1910. Mar. 27. "Paradise Lost" oratorio. Boston, Mass.

BOULANGER, L.
  1918. Dec. 26. "Faust et Helene" cantata. New York, N. Y.

BOURGAULT-DUCOUDRAY, L. A.
  1896. Oct. 17. "L'Interrement d'Ophelie." Boston, Mass.
  1906. April 17. "Rhapsodie Cambodgienne." Boston, Mass.

BOYLE, G. F.
  1912. Feb. 2. Pianoforte Concerto (D minor). New York, N. Y.

BRAHMS, J.
  1862. Feb. First Serenade. New York, N. Y.
  1873. May 29. Serenade in D. New York, N. Y.
  1875. Jan. 16. Hungarian Dances. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1877. Mar. 15. A German Requiem. New York, N. Y.
  1877. Dec. 17. First Symphony (C minor). New York, N. Y.
  1878. Oct. 3. Second Symphony (D major). New York, N. Y.
  1881. Oct. 14. "Academic Overture." Boston, Mass.
  1881. Oct. 29. "Tragic Overture." Boston, Mass.
  1882. Feb. 11. Rhapsody (voices and orchestra). Boston, Mass.
  1882. Dec. 9. Pianoforte Concerto (B flat). New York, N. Y.
  1884. Oct. 24. Third Symphony (F). New York, N. Y.
  1886. Nov. 6. Serenade for Strings (A major). Boston, Mass.
  1886. Dec. 11. Fourth Symphony (E minor). New York, N. Y.
  1889. April 4. Waltzes. Boston, Mass.
  1889. Dec. 7. Violin Concerto (D). Boston, Mass.
  1890. Jan. 31. "Liebeslieder Waltzes." New York, N. Y.
  1896. Mar. 28. Three Hungarian Dances. Boston, Mass.
  1890. April 23. First Pianoforte Concerto (D minor). New York, N. Y.
  1912. Mar. 25. "Song of Triumph." New York, N. Y.

BRAUNFELS, W.
  1921. Oct. 14. Fantastic Variations. Philadelphia, Pa.

BREIL, J.
  1919. Mar. 12. "The Legend" opera. New York, N. Y.

BRIDGE, FRANK.
  1921. Jan. 19. Suite. Boston, Mass.

BRIDGE, J. F.
  1891. Sept. 23. "The Repentance of Nineveh." Worcester, Mass.
  1902. Mar. 27. "The Forging of the Anchor." Brooklyn, N. Y.

BRISTOW, G. F.
  1847. Nov. 14. Two Concert Overtures (Opus 3). New York, N. Y.
  1855. Sept. 27. "Rip van Winkle" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1866. Nov. 17. "Columbus Overture." New York, N. Y.
  1874. Feb. 14. "Arcadian Symphony." New York, N. Y.
  1879. May 10. "Great Republic" overture. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1889. Mar. 6. "The Jibbenainosay" overture. New York, N. Y.

BROCKWAY, H.
  1901. April 6. "Sylvan Suite." Boston, Mass.
  1907. April 6. Symphony (D major). Boston, Mass.

BRONSART, HANS VON
  1881. Jan. 6. Spring Fantaisie. New York, N. Y.

BRUCH, M.
  1868. First Violin Concerto (G minor). New York, N. Y.
  1869. Mar. 13. Symphony in E flat. New York, N. Y.
  1873. Nov. 15. Introduction to "Loreley." New York, N. Y.
  1882. Dec. 15. Third Symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1883. May 4. "Arminius" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1888. Nov. 24. Fantaisie for violin and orchestra. Boston, Mass.
  1889. Nov. 16. "Kol Nidrei" for cello and orchestra. Boston, Mass.
  1892. Feb. 5. Second Violin Concerto (D minor). New York, N. Y.
  1894. Feb. 7. "Romanza" (Op. 42). Boston, Mass.
  1905. Feb. 11. Serenade for violin and orchestra. Boston, Mass.
  1917. Nov. 30. Concerto for Two Pianofortes. New York, N. Y.

BRUCKNER, A.
  1886. July 29. Seventh Symphony (E major). Chicago, Ill.
  1888. Mar. 16. Fourth Symphony (Romantic). New York, N. Y.
  1901. Mar. 9. Third Symphony (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1901. Dec. 28. Fifth Symphony (D flat major). Boston, Mass.
  1904. Feb. 20. Ninth Symphony (unfinished). Chicago, Ill.
  1909. Mar. 12. Eighth Symphony (C minor). Boston, Mass.
  1912. Nov. 21. Sixth Symphony (A major), New York, N. Y.

BRUeLL, I.
  1886. Nov. 9. "Das Golden Kreutz" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1901. Feb. 2. Overture to "Macbeth." Boston, Mass.

BRUNE, A.
  1917. April 13. "A Twilight Picture" overture. Cincinnati, O.
  1920. Mar. 19. "A Fairy Tale" symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.

BRUNEAU, A.
  1903. Oct. 17. "Messidor" entr'acte symphonique. Boston, Mass.
  1903. Nov. 7. "La Belle aux Bois Dormant." Chicago, Ill.
  1906. Jan. 2. "Preludes de l'Ouragan." Boston, Mass.
  1910. Feb. 8. "L'Attaque du Moulin." Harlem, N. Y.
  1921. Feb. 16. "Penthesilee" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.

BUCK, D.
  1876. May 11. Centennial Meditation. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1880. May 20. "Golden Legend" cantata. Cincinnati, O.
  1885. Mar. 31. "Marmion" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1888. "The Light of Asia" cantata. Newark, N. J.
  1891. Feb. 23. "Romance" for four horns and orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1891. April 10. "The Star-Spangled Banner" overture. New York, N. Y.

BUeLOW, HANS von
  1887. Feb. 10. "The Minstrel's Curse," symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1894. April 7. "Funerale." Boston, Mass.

BUNGERT, A.
  1888. Feb. 28. "Auf der Wartling," symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.

BURCK, H.
  1915. Jan. 31. "Meditation." New York, N. Y.

BURMEISTER, R.
  1890. Dec. 12. Pianoforte Concerto in D. New York, N. Y.
  1902. Jan. 10. "The Sisters" tone poem. New York, N. Y.

BUSCH, C.
  1903. Nov. 30. "King Olaf" cantata. Chicago, Ill.

BUSONI, F.
  1892. Feb. 20. Symphonic Suite (Op. 23). Boston, Mass.
  1893. April 15. Symphonic Tone Poem. Boston, Mass.
  1905. Nov. 18. Comedy Overture (C major). Boston, Mass.
  1906. Mar. 31. "Geharnischte" suite. Boston, Mass.
  1910. Mar 11. "Turandot" suite. New York, N. Y.

CADMAN, C. W.
  1916. July. "To a Vanishing Race." Seattle, Wash.
  1918. Mar. 23. "Shanewis" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Aug. 23. "The Sunset Trail." San Diego, Cal.

CAETANI.
  1902. Nov. 15. Symphonic Prelude (A minor). New York, N. Y.

CAPLET, A.
  1906. April 17. "Impressions d'Automne." Boston, Mass.

CARPENTER, J. A.
  1915. Mar. 19. "Adventures in a Perambulator." Chicago, Ill.
  1916. Mar. 10. Concertino. Chicago, Ill.
  1917. June 5. Symphony. Norfolk, Conn.
  1919. Dec. 23. "The Birthday of the Infanta." Chicago, Ill.
  1920. Nov. 26. "A Pilgrim Vision." Philadelphia, Pa.

CARR, B.
  1796. "The Archers of Switzerland." New York, N. Y.

CASELLA, A.
  1919. Feb. 2. "Films--War Pictures." New York, N. Y.
  1920. Dec. 5. "The Venetian Convent." New York, N. Y.

CATALANI, A.
  1909. Jan. 6. "Le Wally" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1919. Jan. 17. "Loreley" opera. Chicago, Ill.

CATEL, C. S.
  1869. Jan. 9. Overture to "Semiramis." New York, N. Y.

CAUFFMAN, F. G.
  1903. Nov. 27. "Salammbo" tone poem. Philadelphia, Pa.

CHABRIER, E.
  1864. Dec. 6. "Espana" rhapsody. New York, N. Y.
  1896. Oct. 24. "Gwendoline" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1899. Mar. 4. "Bourree Fantastique." Boston, Mass.
  1905. Jan. 4. "Danse Slave," Boston, Mass.
  1911. Jan, 6. "Ode a la Musique." New York, N. Y.
  1911. Mar. 3. "Briseis" opera. New York, N. Y.

CHADWICK, G. W.
  1879. Dec. 11 "Rip van Winkle" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1883. Jan. 13. "Thalia" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1884. Mar. 8. Scherzo in F. Boston, Mass.
  1886. Dec. 11. Second Symphony (B flat). Boston, Mass.
  1887. Dec. 24. "Melpomene" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1891. April 2. "The Pilgrims" cantata. Boston, Mass.
  1892. Jan. 10. "A Pastoral Prelude." Boston, Mass.
  1892. May 5. "Phoenix Expirans." Springfield, Mass.
  1892. Oct. 22. "Columbian Ode." Chicago, Ill.
  1894. Oct. 20. Third Symphony (F major). Boston, Mass.
  1900. Feb. 3. "Elegiac" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1901. Sept. 26. "Judith" oratorio. Worcester, Mass.
  1904. April 23. "Euterpe" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1905. Sept. 29. "Cleopatra" symphonic poem. Worcester, Mass.
  1908. Feb. 22. Symphonic Sketches. Boston, Mass.
  1909. June. "Noel" Christmas pastoral. Norfolk, Conn.
  1910. Feb. 12. Sinfonietta in D major. Boston, Mass.
  1911. April 15. Suite Symphonique. Boston, Mass.
  1912. June 4. "Aphrodite" symphonic fantasie. Norfolk, Conn.
  1915. June 3. "Tam o' Shanter" ballad. Norfolk, Conn.
  1918. June 4. "Land of our Hearts." Norfolk, Conn.
  1919. Feb. 2. "The Angel of Death." New York, N. Y.

CHAIKOVSKY, P. I.
  1875. Oct. 25. Pianoforte Concerto (B flat minor). Boston, Mass.
  1876. April 22. "Romeo et Juliette" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1879. Feb. 8. Third Symphony (D). New York, N. Y.
  1880. Jan. 17. Suite for Giant Orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1883. Feb. 24. "Marche Slave." Boston, Mass.
  1883. Dec. 7. Second Symphony (C). New York, N. Y.
  1885. Jan. 23. Serenade for Strings. New York, N. Y.
  1885. Nov. 24. Third Suite (Op. 55). New York, N. Y.
  1886. Nov. 1. Italian Caprice. New York, N. Y.
  1886. Dec. 4. "Manfred" symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1888. Feb. 4. "Mozartiana" suite (Op. 61). New York, N.Y.
  1889. Jan. 19. Violin Concerto. New York, N. Y.
  1889. Jan. 24. Introduction and Fugue. New York, N. Y.
  1889. Mar. 5. Fifth Symphony (E minor). New York, N. Y.
  1889. Mar. 15. First Suite (Op. 43). Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1890. Feb. 1. Fourth Symphony (F minor). New York, N. Y.
  1891. Feb. 4. "Hamlet" overture. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1891. May. 6. Legende and Paternoster. New York, N. Y.
  1878. Dec. 21. "Francesca da Rimini" fantasia. New York, N. Y.
  1892. Oct. 22. "Casse Noisette" suite. Chicago, Ill.
  1893. Dec. 30. Overture--"1812." Boston, Mass.
  1894. Mar. 16. Sixth Symphony (B minor). New York, N. Y.
  1896. Feb. 7. First Symphony (G minor). New York, N. Y.
  1897. Nov. 26. "Voyvode" symphonic ballad. New York, N.Y.
  1898. Nov. 12. Second Pianoforte Concerto (G). New York, N. Y.
  1900. Oct. 19. "La Belle au Bois Dormant" suite. Chicago, Ill.
  1904. Dec. 24. "The Battle of Poltava." New York, N. Y.
  1904. Dec. 24. Hopak from "Mazeppa." New York, N. Y.
  1905. April 1. "Night" fantasia. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Feb. 2. "Eugene Onegin" (Yevgeni Onyegin) opera (in concert
    form). New York, N. Y.
  1908. Oct. 31. Variations on a Rococo Theme. Boston, Mass.
  1910. Mar. 5. "Pique Dame" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1910. Nov. 10. Excerpts from "Jeanne d'Arc." New York, N. Y.

CHAMINADE, C.
  1895. Feb. 5. Concertstueck for Orchestra. Chicago, Ill.
  1897. Dec. 13. "Callirhoe" ballet. New York, N. Y.

CHARPENTIER, G.
  1893. Nov. 24. "Impressions of Italy" suite. Chicago, Ill.
  1905. April 4. "La Vie du Poete" symphonic drama. Boston, Mass.
  1908. Jan. 3. "Louise" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1914. Feb. 26. "Julien" opera. New York, N. Y.

CHAUSSON, E.
  1898. Oct. 22. "Viviani" symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1904. Nov. 18. Poeme for violin and orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1905. April 18. "Hymne Vedique." Boston, Mass.
  1905. Dec. 4. Symphony in B flat. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1906. Jan. 20. Symphony (A flat major). Boston, Mass.
  1908. Jan. 21. "Poeme d'Amour et de la Mer." Boston,
    Mass.
  1919. Jan. 31. Symphony (B flat major). Philadelphia, Pa.

CHAUVET, C. A.
  1902. Jan. 7. "Feuillets d'Album" suite. Boston, Mass.

CHERUBINI, L.
  1842. Jan. 15. Overture to "Les deux Journees." Boston, Mass.
  1866. Feb. 28. Overture to "Anacreon." Boston, Mass.
  1867. Nov. 21. Overture to "Medea." Boston, Mass.
  1872. Feb. "Les deux Journees" (The Water Carrier). New York, N. Y.
  1873. Jan. 9. "Ali Baba" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1876. Feb. 19. "Faniska" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1883. May 2. Mass in D minor. Boston, Mass.
  1892. Dec. 2. Overture. New York, N. Y.

CHEVILLARD, C.
  1903. Jan. 7. "Le Chene et le Roseau." Boston, Mass.

CHIAFFARELLI, A.
  1918. Feb. 17. Prelude and Fugue. New York, N. Y.
  1919. Dec. 5. Prelude to a Merry Play. New York, N. Y.

CHOPIN, F.
  1861. Nov. 9. Second Pianoforte Concerto. New York, N. Y.

CILEA, F.
  1907. Nov. 18. "Adrienne Lecouvreur" opera. New York, N. Y.

CIMAROSA, D.
  1833-4. "Il Matrimonio Segreto" opera. New York, N. Y.

CLAPP, P. G.
  1909. April 29. "Norge" tone poem. Cambridge, Mass.
  1912. Jan. 16. "In Summer" prelude. St. Louis, Mo.
  1912. April 14. Dramatic Poem. New York, N. Y.
  1914. April 11. Symphony in E minor. Boston, Mass.
  1917. April 6. Symphony in E flat. Boston, Mass.

COLE, R. E.
  1919. Mar. 14. "Pioneer Overture." Chicago, Ill.

CONVERSE, C. C.
  1868. Jan. 25. "Festival Overture," Brooklyn, N. Y.

CONVERSE, F. S.
  1899. Jan. 14. Symphony (D minor--first movement). Boston, Mass.
  1900. Dec. 22. "Festival of Pan." Boston, Mass.
  1903. April 11. "Endymion's Narrative." Boston, Mass.
  1905. Jan. 21. "Night" and "Day" tone poems. Boston, Mass.
  1905. Mar. 3. "The Mystic Trumpeter." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1906. Jan. 31. "The Pipe of Desire" opera. Boston, Mass.
  1906. Mar. 3. "La Belle Dame Sans Merci." Providence, R. I.
  1906. Oct. 15. "Jeanne d'Arc" incidental music. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1907. Oct. 2. "Job" dramatic poem. Worcester, Mass.
  1910. Nov. 16. "The Sacrifice" opera. Boston, Mass.
  1911. Jan. 27. Orchestral Fantasy. St. Louis, Mo.
  1912. Jan. 26. "Ormazd" tone poem. St. Louis, Mo.
  1914. May 28. "Cahokia" masque. St. Louis, Mo.
  1917. April 27. "Ave atque Vale" tone poem. Boston, Mass.
  1920. Jan. 30. Symphony in C minor. Boston, Mass.

COPPOLA, P. A.
  1847. Jan. 3. "Nina Pazza per Amore" opera. New York, N. Y.

CORNELIUS, P.
  1888. Oct. 27. "Il Barbiere von Bagdad" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1890. Jan. 4. "Il Barbiere von Bagdad" opera. New York, N. Y.

COWEN, F.
  1882. Nov. 11. Third Symphony "Scandinavian." New York, N. Y.
  1883. Jan. 27. First Symphony (in C). Boston, Mass.
  1883. Nov. 21. "St. Ursula" cantata. New York, N. Y.
  1885. April 11. Fourth Symphony (B minor) "Welsh." New York, N. Y.
  1888. Feb. 28. Fifth Symphony (F). New York, N. Y.
  1890. Nov. 24. Sixth Symphony (E major) "Idyllic." Boston, Mass.
  1902. Oct. 28. "The Butterfly's Ball" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1903. Dec. 18. "Indian Rhapsody." Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1915. Feb. 22. "The Veil" oratorio. Chicago, Ill.

CUI, C.
  1886. Oct. 28. Tarantella. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Mar. 17. Waltz. New York, N. Y.

CURRY, A.
  1911. April 22. "Attala" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.

DALYRAC
  1790-1800. "Nina" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1790-1800. "L'Amant Statue" opera. New Orleans, La.

d'ALBERT, E.
  1887. Nov. 25. First Symphony (F). New York, N. Y.
  1894. Feb. 2. "Esther" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1895. Nov. 30. "Der Rubin" prelude. Boston, Mass.
  1897. Dec. 3. "Gernot" introduction to Act II. Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1901. Oct. 14. "Der Improvisatore" overture. Chicago,
  1905. Feb. 4. Second Pianoforte Concerto (E major). Boston, Mass.
  1908. Feb. 23. "Tiefland" opera. New York, N. Y.

DALCROZE, J.
  1906. Mar. 10. Violin Concerto (C minor). Boston, Mass.

DAMROSCH, L.
  1875. Feb. 22. "Ruth and Naomi" cantata. New York, N. Y.
  1882. April 20. "Sulamith" cantata. New York, N. Y.
  1907. Dec. 1. "Silver Wedding." New York, N. Y.

DAMROSCH, W.
  1896. Feb. 11. "The Scarlet Letter" opera. Boston, Mass.
  1898. Dec. 3. "Manilla Te Deum." New York, N. Y.
  1913. Feb. 27. "Cyrano de Bergerac" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1915. Summer. "Iphigenia in Aulis" incidental music, Berkeley, Cal.

DANIELS, MABEL
  1914. Feb. 19. "The Guests of Sleep." Boston, Mass.

DARGOMYZHKY, A. S.
  1870. May 26. "Kazachok" orchestral sketch. New York, N. Y.

DARLEY, F. T. S.
  1855. Dec. 8. "The Cities of the Plains" oratorio. Philadelphia, Pa.

DAVICO, V.
  1921. Feb. 16. "Impressionna Romana." Boston, Mass.

DAVID, F.
  1874. July 30. Festival March. New York City.

DAVIDOFF, K.
  1907. Mar. 14. Violoncello Concerto. New York, N. Y.

DAVISON, A. T.
  1918. April 28. Tragic Overture. Boston, Mass.

DEBUSSY, C.
  1902. April 1. "Apres-midi d'un Faun," symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1903. Dec. 10. "The Blessed Damosel." Boston, Mass.
  1904, Feb. 10. Three Nocturnes. Boston, Mass.
  1907, Mar. 2. "La Mer." Boston, Mass.
  1908. Feb. 19. "Pelleas et Melisande" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Nov. 15. "Rondes de Printemps." New York, N. Y.
  1910. Jan. 26. "March Ecossais." Boston, Mass.
  1910. Nov. 16. "L'Enfant Prodigue" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1911. Jan. 3. "Iberia" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1912. Feb. 12. "Le Martyre de St. Sebastian." New York, N. Y.
  1917. April 13. "Gigues." New York, N. Y.
  1919. Nov. 13. "Berceuse Heroique." New York, N. Y.
  1920. Jan. 2. "Jeux." Boston, Mass.
  1920. April 16. Fantasy for Pianoforte and Orchestra. Boston, Mass.
  1921. Jan. 19. "Le Jet d'Eau." Boston, Mass.
  1921. Feb. 17. Two Nocturnes and Fantasy. New York, N. Y.

DE KOVEN, R.
  1917. Mar. 8. "The Canterbury Pilgrims" opera. New York, N. Y.

DELAMATER, E.
  1917. April 6. "The Fable of the Hapless Folk-Tune." Chicago, Ill.
  1919. Nov. 19. Suite from "The Betrothed." New York, N. Y.
  1920. April 2. Concerto for organ and orchestra (E major). Chicago,
    Ill.

DE LARA, I.
  1902. Jan. 22. "Messaline" opera. New York, N. Y.

DELIUS, F.
  1909. Nov. 27. "Paris" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1910. Oct. 28. "Brigg Fair" rhapsodie. New York, N. Y.
  1911. Feb. Symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1912. Jan. 26. "In a Summer Garden," tone poem. New York, N. Y.
  1912. Nov. 7. "Life's Dance." Chicago, Ill.
  1915. Nov. 5. "A Dance Rhapsody." Minneapolis, Minn.
  1915. Nov. 26. Pianoforte Concerto (C minor). New York, N. Y.

DITTERSDORF, K.
  1897. Jan. 16. Symphony (C major). Boston, Mass.

DOHNANYI, E.
  1903. Nov. 28. Symphony (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1908. Jan. 29. Violoncello Concerto (D). Indianapolis, Ind.
  1908. Feb. 29. Concert Piece in D major. Boston, Mass.
  1914. Oct. 22. Suite No. 19. Minneapolis, Minn.

DONIZETTI, G.
  1838. June 18. "L'Elisir d'Amore" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1841. Dec. 28. "Lucia di Lammermoor" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1843. Feb. 9. "La Favorita" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1843. Mar. 6. "La Fille du Regiment" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1843. Oct. 3. "Gemma di Vergi" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1843. Dec. 15. "Marino Faliero" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1844. April 27. "Lucrezia Borgia" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1844. May 6. "Anne Boleyn" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1844. Nov. 28. "Belisario" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1846. Mar. 9. "Don Pasquale" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1847. Jan. 4. "Linda di Chamounix" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1848. "Robert Devereux" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1849. Dec. 10. "Marie de Rohan" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1849. Dec. 16. "The Martyrs" ("Il Poliuto" in oratorio form). Boston,
    Mass.
  1850. Nov. 22. "Parisina" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1852. Oct. 27. "Betley" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1853. "Torquato Tasso" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1859. May 25. "Il Poliuto" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1864. Nov. 25. "Don Sebastian" opera. New York, N. Y.

DOPPER, C.
  1912. Dec. 3. "Rembrandt" 3rd symphony (C minor). St. Paul, Minn.

DRAESEKE, F.
  1888. Nov. 22. "Serenata." New York, N. Y.
  1899. Dec. 9. "Jubel" overture. Boston, Mass.

DUBOIS, TH.
  1898. Jan. 27. Violin Concerto (D minor). Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1900. Feb. 11. "Marche de Batteurs." Boston, Mass.
  1900. April 27. Rigaudon and Danses Cenemoles. Boston, Mass.
  1903. Feb. 8. "Paradise Lost" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1904. Feb. 6. "Frithjof" overture. Boston, Mass.

DUCASSE, R.
  1910. April 16. "Francaise," suite (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1910. April 19. "Variations Plaisantes." Boston, Mass.
  1912. Mar. 11. "Petit Suite." Boston, Mass.
  1915. Jan. 31. "La Joli Jeu de Furet." New York, N. Y.
  1918. Nov. 14. "Sarabande" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.

DUKAS, P.
  1899. Jan. 13. "The Sorcerer's Apprentice." Chicago, Ill.
  1910. Jan. 26. "Ariana et Barbe Bleue" excerpts. Boston, Mass.
  1911. Jan. 25. "Polyeucte" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1911. Feb. 3. "Ariana et Barbe Bleue" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1911. Feb. 5. Symphony in C. New York, N. Y.
  1916. Jan. 7. "Le Peri" dance poem. San Francisco, Cal.

DUPARC, M. E. H.
  1896. Nov. 13. "Lenore" symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1919. Nov. 13. "Aux Etoiles" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.

DUPUIS, A.
  1920. Nov. 19. "Jean Michel" symphonic fragments. Cincinnati, O.

DURANTE, F.
  1870. Jan. 20. Magnificat in B. Boston, Mass.

DVO[vR]AK, A.
  1879. Dec. 5. Slavonic Dances (No. 7 and 8). Boston, Mass.
  1880. Feb. 4. Slavonic Rhapsodie No. 3. Cincinnati, O.
  1880. Mar. 11. Slavonic Rhapsodie No. 2. New York, N. Y.
  1883. Jan. 6. First Symphony (D). New York, N. Y.
  1884. Oct. 24. "Husitska" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1884. Nov. 8. Scherzo Capriccioso. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1886. Jan. 9. Second Symphony (D minor). New York, N. Y.
  1886. Mar. 20. "The Spectre Bride" cantata. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1886. Nov. 6. "Legends" (Op. 59. 1st Collection). Boston, Mass.
  1886. Dec. 23. Slavonic Rhapsody No. 1. Boston, Mass.
  1887. Mar. 1. Legende. New York, N. Y.
  1887. Mar. 31. Suite (Op. 39). New York, N. Y.
  1887. Oct. 22. Suite in D. Boston, Mass.
  1887. Nov. 12. Slavonic Dances, second series. New York, N. Y.
  1888. July 19. Symphonic Variations (Op. 78). Chicago, Ill.
  1888. Nov. 17. Slavonic Dances (3rd and 4th series). Boston, Mass.
  1890. Mar. 23. Pianoforte Concerto (G minor. Op. 33). Boston, Mass.
  1892. Feb. 27. Fourth Symphony (G major). Boston, Mass.
  1892. Oct. 21. "Carnival Overture" and "Otello." New York, N. Y.
  1893. Dec. 15. Fifth Symphony (From the New World). New York, N. Y.
  1894. Jan. 5. Violin Concerto (A. Op. 53). New York, N. Y.
  1896. Dec. 19. Violoncello Concerto (B minor). Boston, Mass.
  1897. Jan. 1. "The Golden Spinning Wheel." Chicago, Ill.
  1897. Feb. 4. "The Water Fay" symphonic poem. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1897. April 3. Rondo for Violoncello (Op. 94). Boston, Mass.
  1899. Oct. 20. "The Wild Dove" tone poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1899. Nov. 18. "Pisen Bohatyrske," symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1901. Nov. 15. "Mein Heim" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1910. Dec. 4. "In the Spinning Room." New York, N. Y.
  1911. Feb. 15. Symphony (Posthumous). New York, N. Y.
  1919. Nov. 21. Third Symphony (F major). New York, N. Y.

DVORSKY, M. (JOSEF HOFMANN).
  1916. Nov. 24. Symphonic Duologue. Cincinnati, O.
  1919. Nov. 7. "The Haunted Castle" tone poem. Philadelphia, Pa.

ECKER, K.
  1885. Oct. 31. Concert Overture. Boston, Mass.

ECKERT, K. A. F.
  1889. Nov. 16. Violoncello Concerto (A minor). Boston, Mass.

ELGAR, E.
  1901. Mar. 15. "Cockaigne" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1902. Jan. 3. Variations on an Original Theme. Chicago, Ill.
  1902. Nov. 28. "Pomp" and "Circumstance" marches. Chicago, Ill.
  1903. Mar. 23. "Dream of Gerontius" oratorio. Chicago, Ill.
  1903. Nov. 7. "Grania and Diamid" incidental music. Chicago, Ill.
  1904. Feb. 9. "The Apostles" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1904. Nov. 5. "In the South" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1904. Nov. 6. Fourth Symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1905. Jan. 20. "Froissart" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1905. Feb. 8. "Benedictus." New York, N. Y.
  1906. Nov. 27. "The Banner of St. George." New York, N. Y.
  1907. Feb. 7. "Romance." New York, N. Y.
  1907. Mar. 26. "The Kingdom" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Jan. 3. First Symphony (A flat). New York, N. Y.
  1911. Nov. 24. Second Symphony (E flat). Cincinnati, O.
  1913, Dec. 12. "Falstaff" (Opus 68). New York, N. Y.
  1916. Nov. 26. "Sospire." New York, N. Y.
  1919. Mar. 2. "Carillon" and "Le Drapeau Belge." New York, N. Y.
  1920. Feb. 13. "Enigma" variations. Philadelphia, Pa.

ENESCO, G.
  1902. Jan. 7. "Poeme Roumain." Boston, Mass.
  1911. Jan. 3. Suite (Op. 9). New York, N. Y.
  1911. Feb. 17. Symphony (A flat major). New York, N. Y.

ERNST, H. W.
  1878. Nov. 23. Violin Concerto (Pathetique). New York, N. Y.

ERTEL, J. P.
  1908. April 16. "The Midnight Review" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.

FANELLI, E.
  1912. Nov. 16. "Thebes" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.

FARWELL, A.
  1917. Dec. 26. "The Evergreen Tree" masque. New York, N. Y.
  1919. July 4. "Chant of Victory." Berkeley, Cal.

FAURE, G.
  1906. Jan. 2. "Pavane." Boston, Mass.
  1919. Mar. 28. "Penelope" prelude. Boston, Mass.

FEVRIER
  1913. Dec. 5. "Mona Vanna" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1919. Jan. 14. "Gismonda" opera. Chicago, Ill.

FIBICH, Z.
  1903. Jan. 31. "A Night at Karlstein" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1916. Jan. 20. "At Evening" idyll. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Jan. 2. Overture to a Merry Play. New York, N. Y.

FITELBERG, G.
  1912. Dec. 6. "Das Lied vom Falcon" tone poem. St. Louis, Mo.
  1921. Nov. 4. Polish Rhapsody. Philadelphia, Pa.

FLOERSHEIM, O.
  1888. Jan. 28. "Elevation" for organ and orchestra. Boston, Mass.

FLORIDIA, P.
  1907. Mar. 22. Symphony (D minor). Cincinnati, O.
  1910. Aug. 29. "Paoletta" opera. Cincinnati, O.

FLOTOW, F.
  1852. Nov. 1. "Martha" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1856. Oct. 28. "Stradella" opera. New York, N. Y.

FOOTE, A.
  1887. Feb. 5. "In the Mountains" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1888. Jan. 26. "The Wreck of the Hesperus" cantata. Boston, Mass.
  1889. Nov. 23. Suite for Strings (D major). Boston, Mass.
  1891. Jan. 24. "Francesca da Rimini" symphonic prologue. Boston, Mass.
  1893. Feb 4. "The Skeleton in Armor" ballad. Boston, Mass.
  1907. Jan. 20. Four Character Pieces. Chicago, Ill.
  1909. April 17. Suite (E major). Boston, Mass.
  1911. Jan. 27. Serenade (E major). St. Louis, Mo.

FORSYTH, C.
  1905. Jan. 4. Concerto in G minor (1st movement). Boston, Mass.

FRANCHETTI, A.
  1890. Nov. 26. "Asrael" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1910. Jan. 22. "Germania" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1913. Nov. 20. "Cristoforo Colombo" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.

FRANCK, C.
  1895. Nov. 8. "Les Sylphides" symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1898. Jan. 29. "The Wild Huntsman" symphonic poem. Cincinnati, O.
  1898. Mar. 7. Variations Symphoniques. Chicago, Ill.
  1899. April 15. Symphony (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1900. Feb. 17. "Les Eolides" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1900. Mar. 25. "The Beatitudes" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1905. Dec. 2. "Psyche and Cupid" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1906. Dec. 15. "Morceau Symphonique" (Redemption). New York, N. Y.
  1910. April 19. Variations Plaisantes. Boston, Mass.
  1914. Jan. 16. Prelude, Chorale, and Fugue. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Oct. 21. Organ Chorale No. 2. Boston, Mass.

FRIED, O.
  1907. Mar. 30. Prelude and Double Fugue for Strings. Boston, Mass.

FRY, WM. H.
  1845. June 4. "Leonora" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1853. Four Symphonies, "Christmas, or Santa Claus," "The Breaking
    Heart," "Childe Harold," "A Day in the Country." New York, N. Y.
  1863. April. "Notre Dame de Paris" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.

FUCHS, R.
  1882. Mar. 9. Serenade in D. Boston, Mass.
  1885. Oct. 31. Symphony in C major. Boston, Mass.
  1893. Feb. 3. Serenade (strings and two horns). New York, N. Y.

GADE
  1858. Nov. 28. Fifth Symphony. New York, N. Y.

GADSBY, H. R.
  1886. Oct. 26. "The Forest of Arden" orchestral scene. New York, N. Y.

GADE, N. W.
  1852. Nov. 13. "Ossian" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1852. Dec. 12. First Symphony (C minor). New York, N. Y.
  1868. April 13. "The Crusaders" cantata. Boston, Mass.
  1868. Nov. 28. "Hamlet" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1869. Jan. 16. "Spring" fantasia. New York, N. Y.
  1869. Feb. 18. Second Symphony (E). Boston, Mass.
  1871. Feb. 23. Third Symphony (A minor). Boston, Mass.
  1872. Feb. 23. Third Concert Overture, Boston, Mass.
  1872. Dec. 5. Fifth Symphony (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1873. Feb. 15. Eighth Symphony (B minor). Boston, Mass.
  1874. Feb. 14. "Michael Angelo" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1877. Jan. 16. "Noveletten." New York, N. Y.

GALLICO, P.
  1921. June 7. "The Apocalypse" oratorio. Rock Island, Ill.

GARCIA, M.
  1825-6. "L'Amante Astuto" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1825-6. "La Figlia del Aria." New York, N. Y.

GARDNER, S.
  1919. July 7. "New Russia." New York, N. Y.
  1920. Dec. 14. Violin Concerto. Providence, R. I.

GAERTNER, L. von
  1903. Feb. 5. "Macbeth" tone poem. New York, N. Y.

GAUBERT, P.
  1912. Mar. 11. "Poeme Elegiaque." Boston, Mass.

GEORGES, A.
  1905. Jan. 4. "Prelude d'Axel." Boston, Mass.

GERICKE, W.
  1886. Jan. 16. "Choirs of Homage." Boston, Mass.
  1886. Mar. 13. Three Movements from Serenade. Boston, Mass.

GERMAN, E.
  1895. Oct. 25. Three Dances. Chicago, Ill.
  1907. Nov. 17. West Rhapsody. New York, N. Y.

GERNSHEIM, F.
  1882. Dec. 9. Symphony (E flat). Boston, Mass.
  1866. Mar. 23. Tarantella (from Symphony in F). Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1897. Oct. 23. Violin Concerto (D major). Boston, Mass.
  1911. Jan. 28. "To a Drama" tome poem. Boston, Mass.

GILBERT, H. F.
  1906. Mar. 10. "Salammbo's Invocation" New York, N. Y.
  1910. Aug. 17. Comedy Overture on Negro Themes. New York, N. Y.
  1912. June 5. Negro Rhapsody. Norfolk, Conn.
  1914. Sept. "Riders to the Sea." Peterboro, N. H.
  1921. Mar. 4. "Indian Sketches" suite. Boston, Mass.

GILCHRIST, W. W.
  1909. April 1. "The Lamb of God" oratorio. New York, N. Y.

GILSON, P.
  1896. Dec. 17. "La Mer" symphony. New York, N. Y.

GIORDANO, U.
  1896. Nov. 13. "Andrea Chenier" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Jan. 31. "Siberia" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1906. Dec. 5. "Fedora" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1915. Jan. 25. "Madame Sans-Gene" opera. New York, N. Y.

GLAZUNOF, A.
  1893. June 7. Triumphal March. Chicago, Ill.
  1896. Nov. 13. Oriental Rhapsody. Chicago, Ill.
  1897. Oct. 16. "Poeme Lyrique" (Op. 42). Boston, Mass.
  1897. Oct. 29. Second Concert Waltz. Chicago, Ill.
  1897. Nov. 4 "Printemps." Chicago, Ill.
  1898. Mar. 5. Fifth Symphony (B flat major). New York, N. Y.
  1899. Oct. 21. Sixth Symphony (C minor). Boston, Mass.
  1901. Mar. 15. "Ruses d'Amor." Chicago, Ill.
  1901. Dec. 7. Overture Solennelle. Chicago, Ill.
  1902. Jan. 25. Suite from "Raymonda" ballet. Boston, Mass.
  1903. Oct. 24. Fourth Symphony (E flat). Boston, Mass.
  1903. Nov. 20. Seventh Symphony (F). Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1904. Jan. 23. "Moyen Age" suite. Chicago, Ill.
  1904. Mar. 23. "Stenka Razin" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1904. April 9. "Carnaval" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1904. Dec. 24. "Stenka Razin" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Jan. 27. "The Kremlin" symphonic picture. Boston, Mass.
  1906. Nov. 15. Scene Dansante. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Dec. 20. Third Symphony (D). Opus 33. New York, N. Y.
  1907. Nov. 14. Eighth Symphony (E flat). New York, N. Y.
  1908. Feb. 13. "Winter" from ballet "The Seasons." New York, N. Y.
  1910. Mar. 4. Violin Concerto. New York, N. Y.

GLEASON, F. G.
  1904. April 17. "Edris" symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.

GLIERE, R. M.
  1906. Mar 17. First Symphony (E flat). New York, N. Y.
  1918. Jan. 18. Third Symphony "Ilia Murometz." Chicago, Ill.

GLINKA, M. I.
  1870. July 14. "Jota Aragonese" New York, N. Y.
  1870. Aug. 25. "Kamarinskaya." New York, N. Y.
  1873. July 10. "Rouslane et Ludmilla" overture. New York, N. Y.

GLOVER, J. W.
  1897. Mar. 17. "St. Patrick at Tara" cantata. New York, N. Y.

GLUCK, C. W.
  1796. July. "Iphegenie en Aulide" overture. Charleston, S. C.
  1875. Jan. 8. "Paris and Helen" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1896. Dec. 26. "Don Juan" selections from. Boston, Mass.
  1903. Jan. 27. Symphony (A major). New York, N. Y.
  1909. Dec. 25. "Orfeo ed Eurydice" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1910. Nov. 14. "Armide" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1916. Nov. 25. "Iphigenia in Tauris" opera. New York, N. Y.

GNECCHI, V.
  1914. Feb. 26. "Cassandra" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.

GODARD, B.
  1883. Nov. 17. Violin Concerto "Romantique." Boston, Mass.

GOETZ, H.
  1880. Jan. 8. Symphony (F major). Cambridge, Mass.
  1882. April 15. Violin Concerto (B flat), New York, N. Y.
  1886. Jan. 4. "The Taming of the Shrew" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Mar. 30. "Spring" overture. Boston, Mass.

GOLDMARK, K.
  1870. Feb. 5. "Sakuntala" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1877. Jan. 13. "Laendliche Hochzeit" symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1878. Feb. 16. Wedding March and Variations. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1879. Dec. 3. "Penthesilea" overture. Cincinnati, O.
  1885. Dec. 2. "Die Koenigen von Saba" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1887. Jan. 3. "Merlin" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1888. April 7. Second Symphony (E flat major). Boston, Mass.
  1889. Dec. 4. "In the Spring" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1890. Nov. 1. "Prometheus" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1890. Dec. 6. Violin Concerto (A minor). Boston, Mass.
  1894. May 23. "Sappho" overture. Cincinnati, O.
  1894. Dec. 28. Scherzo (A major. Op. 45). Chicago, Ill.
  1896. Nov. 21. "Das Heimchen am Herd," intermezzo from. Chicago, Ill.
  1904. Dec. 3. "In Italy" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1912. Nov. 7. "Das Heimchen am Herd" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.

GOLDMARK, R.
  1900. Jan. 13. "Hiawatha" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1914. Mar. 14. "Samson" tone poem. Boston, Mass.

GOMEZ, A. C.
  1884. Dec. "Il Guarany" opera. New York, N. Y.

GOOSSENS, E.
  1920. Oct. 22. "By the Tarn" sketch. Chicago, Ill.

GOSSINEC
  1790. Oct. 7. "Le Tonnelier" musical play. New York, N. Y.

GOUNOD, C. F.
  1863. Nov. 18. "Faust" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1867. July 1. "La Reine de Saba," ballet music of. New York, N. Y.
  1867. Dec. 14. "Romeo et Juliette" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1874. May 14. "Le Medecin Malgre Lui" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1874. May 20. "Mireille" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1882. Dec. 6. "Redemption" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1884. Dec. 18. "Mireille" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1889. Jan. 12. "La Reine de Saba" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1893. Nov. 16. "Philemon et Baucis" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1902. Feb. 9. "Gallia" oratorio. Boston, Mass.

GRAEDENER, K. G. P.
  1888. Feb. 18. Overture. Boston, Mass.

GRAINGER, P.
  1913. April 17. Folk Tune Settings. Norfolk, Conn.
  1916. June. "In a Nutshell" suite. Norfolk, Conn.
  1917. Jan. 26. "The Warriors." New York, N. Y.

GRANADOS, P.
  1916. Jan. 28. "Goyescas" opera. New York, N. Y.

DE GREEF, A.
  1918. Dec. 8. Four Old Flemish Songs. New York, N. Y.

GRELL, E.
  1889. Mar. 27. "Missa Solemnis." New York, N. Y.

GRETRY, A. E. M.
  1790-1800. "Zemire et Azor" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1790-1800. "Fausse Magie" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1790-1800. "Richard Coeur de Lion" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1908. Mar. 14. "Cephalus et Procris" three dances from. Boston, Mass.

GRIEG, E.
  1874. Oct. 28. Pianoforte Concerto (A minor). Boston, Mass.
  1881. Dec. 11. Norwegian Melodies. New York, N. Y.
  1883. Feb. 3. Two Melodies for Strings. Boston, Mass.
  1888. Nov. 24. "In Autumn" overture. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1889. Jan. 24. "Peer Gynt" suite. New York, N. Y.
  1899. Jan. 17. Symphonic Dances. Chicago, Ill.
  1911. Nov. 18. Old Norwegian Romance. Boston, Mass.

GRIFFES, C. T.
  1919. Mar. 24. Three Songs. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1919. Nov. 16. Poem for flute and orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1919. Nov. 28. "The Pleasure Dome of Kubla Khan." Boston, Mass.

GRIMM, J. O.
  1866. Dec. 3. Suite in Canon Form. New York, N. Y.
  1873. May 22. Second Suite in Canon Form. New York, N. Y.
  1884. Feb. 23. Symphony in D minor. Boston, Mass.

GRISAR, A.
  1858-9. "Les Amours du Diable" opera. New Orleans, La.

GUILMANT, A.
  1879. Dec. 5. First Symphony (1st movement). Boston, Mass.
  1882. Nov. 29. First Symphony complete. Boston, Mass.

GRUENBERG, LOUIS
  1921. Oct. 23. "The Hill of Dreams" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.

GUIRARD, E.
  1900. Mar. 10. Caprice for violin and orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Jan. 2. Chasse Fantastique. Boston, Mass.

HADLEY, H. K.
  1897. Dec. 2. First Symphony, "Youth and Life." New York, N. Y.
  1901. Dec. 20. Second Symphony, "The Four Seasons." New York, N. Y.
  1902. Mar. 14. Suite Orientale. Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1907. April 13. "Salome" tone poem. Boston, Mass.
  1908. April 11. Third Symphony (B minor). Boston, Mass.
  1909. May 28. "The Culprit Fay" rhapsody. Grand Rapids, Mich.
  1910. Jan. 7. Symphonic Fantasia. St. Louis, Mo.
  1911. June 6. Fourth Symphony--"North, South, East and West." Norfolk,
    Conn.
  1911. Aug. 10. "The Atonement of Pan" suite. San Francisco, Cal.
  1914. June 2. "Lucifer" tone poem. Norfolk, Conn.
  1917. Dec. 26. "Azora" opera. Chicago, Ill.
  1918. Oct. 18. "Bianca" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Jan. 31. "Cleopatra's Night" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Nov. 17. "The Ocean" tone poem. New York, N. Y.

HALEVY, J.
  1843. "L'Eclair" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1858-9. "La Juive" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1858-9. "Jaquarita L'Indienne" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1858-9. "Reine de Chypre" opera. New Orleans, La.

HALM, AUG.
  1910. April 23. Symphony (D minor). Boston, Mass.

HAMERIK, A.
  1873. Sept. 23. "Nordish" suite. New York, N. Y.
  1884. May 1. Christian Trilogy. Baltimore, Md.

HANDEL, G. F.
  1770. Jan. 9. "Messiah" (13 numbers). New York, N. Y.
  1801. "Messiah" (in part). Philadelphia, Pa.
  1818. Dec. 25. "Messiah" (complete). Boston, Mass.
  1842. Oct. 31. "Israel in Egypt" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1842. Nov. 22. "Acis and Galatea" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1845. Jan. 26. "Samson" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1845. Dec. 21. "Moses in Egypt" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1847. Dec. 5. "Judas Maccabeus" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1850. Mar. 9. "Jephtha" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1855. Nov. 18. "Solomon" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1868. Oct. 21. Royal Fireworks Music. New York, N. Y.
  1871. Nov. 23. Concerto for Oboe. Boston, Mass.
  1876. April. 16. "Joshua" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1881. Feb. 25. "L'Allegro, Il Penseroso, ed Il Moderato." New York,
    N. Y.
  1891. Sept. 25. "Occasional Oratorio" overture. Worcester, Mass.
  1891. Dec. 26. Concerto for strings and two wind instruments. Boston,
    Mass.
  1894. Sept. 27. Concerto for organ (B flat). Worcester, Mass.
  1896. April 17. Concerto for strings. Chicago, Ill.
  1896. Dec. 26. First Overture (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1900. Oct. 30. Fourth Organ Concerto (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1907. Mar. 31. "Belshazzar" oratorio. Boston, Mass.

d'HARCOURT, E.
  1906. Mar. 24. Overture to "Tasso." Boston, Mass.

HARTMANN, E.
  1894. Feb. 7. "Nordische Heerfahrt" overture. Boston, Mass.

HARTMANN, P.
  1907. April 3. "St. Peter" oratorio. New York, N. Y.

HAUSEGGER, S. von
  1901. Nov. 16. "Barbarossa" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.

HAYDN, JOSEPH
  1796. July. "Stabat Mater." Charleston, S. C.
  1810. "The Creation" oratorio (part). Bethlehem, Pa.
  1810. "The Seasons" oratorio (part). Bethlehem, Pa.
  1816. "The Creation" oratorio (part). Boston, Mass.
  1819. Feb. 13. "The Creation" oratorio complete. Boston, Mass.
  1843. Jan. 7. Military Symphony (G major). Boston, Mass.
  1853. Jan. 1. Eighth Symphony. Boston, Mass.
  1855. Feb. 17. Fifth Symphony. Boston, Mass.
  1864. "The Seasons" oratorio (complete). Boston, Mass.
  1865. Mar. 11. First Symphony (E flat). New York, N. Y.
  1867. Nov. 9. Kaiser Fritz Hymn. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1868. Dec. 4. Symphony in B flat. Boston, Mass.
  1871. Dec. 7. Third Symphony (E flat). Boston, Mass.
  1872. Feb. 1. Oxford Symphony (G). Boston, Mass.
  1877. Jan. 22. Ninth Symphony (C). New York, N. Y.
  1877. Jan. 30. "The Tempest" New York, N. Y.
  1888. April 6. "The Bear" symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1890. Nov. 22. Concerto for violoncello. Boston, Mass.
  1910. Mar. 6. Concerto for violin. New York, N. Y.

HENBERGER, R.
  1886. Nov. 13. Overture to "Cain." Boston, Mass.

HENSCHEL, G.
  1883. Feb. 17. Serenade for Strings. Boston, Mass.
  1892. April 16. Suite from "Hamlet." Boston, Mass.
  1896. April 24. "Stabat Mater" cantata. New York, N. Y.
  1902. Dec. 2. "Requiem." Boston, Mass.

HERBERT, V.
  1888. Dec. 1. "Serenade." New York, N. Y.
  1891. Sept. 24. "The Captive" oratorio. Worcester, Mass.
  1894. Mar. 10. Second Violoncello Concerto. New York, N. Y.
  1901. Jan. 18. "Hero and Leander" symphonic poem. Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1901. Dec. 6. "Woodland Fancies" suite. Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1902. Jan. 2. "Columbus" suite. Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1911. Feb. 25. "Natoma" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1914. Jan. 24. "Madeline" opera. New York, N. Y.

HEROLD, L. J. F.
  1840. Mar. 20. "Zampa" opera. New York, N. Y.

HILL, E. B.
  1915. Dec. 31. "The Parting of Lancelot and Guinevere" symphonic poem.
    St. Louis, Mo.
  1918. Jan. 27. "Stevensoniana" suite. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Oct. 29. "The Fall of the House of Usher" symphonic poem.
    Boston, Mass.

HILLER, F.
  1858. Mar. 6. Symphony in E. New York, N. Y.
  1860. May 19. "Saul" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1863. Nov. 7. Second Concerto (A). New York, N. Y.
  1874. May 21. Dramatic Fantasia. New York, N. Y.

HINTON, A.
  1907. Oct. 4. Pianoforte Concerto (D minor). Worcester, Mass.
  1913. Nov. 21. Second Symphony (C minor). Minneapolis, Minn.

HOFFMAN, H.
  1880. Feb. 22 "Cinderella" cantata. New York, N. Y.

HOFMANN, H.
  1874. May 14. "Hungarian" suite. New York, N. Y.
  1875. Feb. 6. "Frithjof" symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1877. July 11. "Pictures from the North." Chicago, Ill.
  1882. July 12. Overture to a Drama. Chicago, Ill.

HOFMANN, J.
  1908. Feb. 28. Third Pianoforte Concerto. New York, N. Y.

HOHNSTOCK, C.
  1865. Mar. 4. "Hail Columbia" overture. Brooklyn, N. Y.

HOLBROOKE, J.
  1913. Jan. 11. "Queen Mab" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.

HOLLAENDER, G.
  1884. Dec. 3. Romance for violin and orchestra. New York, N. Y.

HOLMES, A.
  1904. Jan. 5. "Irlande" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.

HOLST, G.
  1920. Dec. 31. "The Planets" symphony. Chicago, Ill.

HOPEKIRK, H.
  1904. April 16. Concert Piece (D minor). Boston, Mass.

HOWE, J. H.
  1916. July 12. Festival Overture. New York, N. Y.

HUBAY, J.
  1918. Jan. 6. Violin Concerto. New York, N. Y.

HUBER, H.
  1882. Feb. 11. "Tell" symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1887. July 21. "Roemische Karneval." Chicago, Ill.
  1902. Oct. 25. Second Symphony (E minor). Boston, Mass.

HUeE, G.
  1905. April 18. "Titania" symphonic suite. Boston, Mass.
  1914. Jan. 25. Fantasia for flute and orchestra. New York N. Y.
  1916. Feb. 17. "Croquois d'Orient" suite. New York, N. Y.

HUGO, J. A.
  1919. Mar. 12. "The Temple Dancer" opera. New York, N. Y.

HUMISTON, W. H.
  1906. May 3. Southern Fantasy. Orange, N. J.
  1919. Jan. 26. Suite (F sharp minor). New York, N. Y.

HUMPERDINCK, E.
  1895. Oct. 8. "Haensel und Gretel" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1896. Dec. 26. "Koenigskinder" selections from. Boston, Mass.
  1907. Dec. 21. "The Forced Marriage" ("Die Heirat wider Willen")
    overture. Boston, Mass.
  1910. Dec. 28. "Koenigskinder" opera. New York, N. Y.

HUSS, H. H.
  1887. July. Rhapsody. New York, N. Y.
  1894. Dec. 29. Pianoforte Concerto (B major). Boston, Mass.
  1896. April 1. "Cleopatra's Death" dramatic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1897. June 25. Festival March. New York, N. Y.
  1906. April 2. Violin Concerto (D minor). New York, N. Y.

ILYINSKY, A. A.
  1907. Dec. 12. "Mir and Antra" suite. New York, N. Y.

d'INDY, V.
  1888. Dec. 1. "Wallenstein Trilogy." New York, N. Y.
  1898. April 23. "Istar" symphonic variations. Chicago, Ill.
  1900. Feb. 10. "Medie" suite. Boston, Mass.
  1901. Dec. 16. "La Foret Enchantee" legende. Chicago, Ill.
  1902. Jan. 7. "Fervaal" introduction. Boston, Mass.
  1902. April 5. Second Symphony (B flat major) "On a Mountain Air."
    Boston, Mass.
  1903. Jan. 5. Fantasia of French Folk Themes. Boston, Mass.
  1903. Oct. 31. "L'Etranger" introduction. Chicago, Ill.
  1904. Jan. 5. Choral Varie. Boston, Mass.
  1906. Feb. 6. "St. Mary Magdalene" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1907. Oct. 18. "Jour d'ete a la Montagne" symphonic poem. Chicago,
    Ill.
  1910. Jan. 26. "Souvenirs" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1916. May 4. "Le Chant de la Cloche" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1919. Oct. 24. Sinfonia Brevis de Bello Gallico. Boston, Mass.
  1919. Oct. 31. "La Queste de Dieu." Chicago, Ill.
  1919. Nov. 13. Third Symphony. New York, N. Y.

IVANOF, I.
  1904. Feb. 11. Caucasian Sketches. New York, N. Y.
  1907. Feb. 28. Second Caucasian Suite. New York, N. Y.
  1912. Nov. 21. American Rhapsody. New York, N. Y.

JACOBI, F.
  1917. Dec. 6. "California" suite. San Francisco, Cal.

JAeRNEFELT, A.
  1902. Nov. 4. "Korsholm" symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1913. Nov. 14. "Praeludium." New York, N. Y.

JENSEN, A.
  1886. Jan. 21. Wedding Music. Jersey City, N. J.

JERAL
  1918. Mar. 2. Violincello Concerto. New York, N. Y.

JOACHIM, J.
  1868. Dec. 10. Hungarian Concerto (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1871. June 27. March in C. New York, N. Y.
  1871. July 21. March in D. New York, N. Y.
  1881. Nov. 26. Violin Concerto (Op. 11). Boston, Mass.
  1891. Jan. 10. Violin Concerto in G (Op. 3). New York, N. Y.
  1894. Dec. 7. Theme and Variations. New York, N. Y.

JUON, P.
  1907. Jan. 25. "Watchman's Song" fantasie. Philadelphia, Pa.

JURASSORSKY
  1918. Jan. 19. "The Phantoms" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.

KAHN, R.
  1895. Mar. 23. "Elegie" overture, C minor. Boston, Mass.

KALINNIKOF
  1905. Feb. 25. Symphony in A. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Jan. 6. Second Symphony (G minor). New York, N. Y.
  1920. Jan. 23. "The Fir Tree and the Palm" symphonic poem. New York,
    N. Y.

KALLIWODA, J. W.
  1846. Mar. 7. First Symphony (D minor). New York, N. Y.

KAUN, H.
  1898. Jan. 7. Festival March and Hymn. Chicago, Ill.
  1898. Jan. 14. Symphony (D minor). Chicago, Ill.
  1899. Feb. 3. "Der Maler von Antwerpen" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1903. Feb. 7. "Minnehaha" symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1903. Feb. 7. "Hiawatha" symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.

KELLEY, E. S.
  1892. June 9. "Puritania" comic opera. Boston, Mass.
  1894. "Aladdin" and "A Chinese Suite for Orchestra." San Francisco, Cal.
  1913. June 3. "New England" second symphony. Norfolk, Conn.
  1918. May 10. "The Pilgrim's Progress" cantata. Cincinnati, O.
  1918. Nov. 14. "A California Idyll." New York, N. Y.

KERNOCHAN, M.
  1914. Feb. 6. "The Foolish Virgins." E. Orange, N. J.

KIEL, F.
  1879. April 15. "Christus" oratorio. New York, N. Y.

KIENZL, W.
  1913. Feb. 24. "Les Ranz des Vaches." Philadelphia, Pa.

KLEIN, B. O.
  1903. Dec. 8. Suite in F for cello and orchestra. New York, N. Y.

KLOSE, F.
  1915. April 3. Prelude and Double Fugue for organ and orchestra.
    Boston, Mass.

KLUGHARDT, A.
  1891. Mar. 7. Symphony (D major). Boston, Mass.
  1912. Dec. 21. Violoncello Concerto (Op. 59). Boston, Mass.

KNORR, I.
  1895. Mar. 30. Variations on an Ukraine Folk-Song. Boston, Mass.

KOESSLER, H.
  1902. Mar. 15. Symphonic Variations. Boston, Mass.

KOLAR, V.
  1911. Mar. 3. "Hiawatha." New York, N. Y.
  1912. Feb. 16. "A Fairy Tale." New York, N. Y.
  1914. Jan. 25. Suite for Orchestra. New York, N. Y.

KONIUS, G. E.
  1906. Feb. 24. "Childhood" suite. New York, N. Y.

KORNGOLD, E. W.
  1912. Nov. 28. Overture to a Play. New York, N. Y.
  1914. April 3. Sinfonietta (Op. 5). Chicago, Ill.
  1921. Nov. 19. "Die Tote Stadt" opera. New York, N. Y.

de KOVEN, R.
  1920. Jan. 2. "Rip van Winkle" opera. Chicago, Ill.

KRUG, A.
  1887. Jan. 15. Symphonic prologue to "Otello." Boston, Mass.

KURTZ, E. F.
  1920. Dec. 12. Victory March. Cincinnati, O.

LACHAUME, A.
  1897. Dec. 21. "In Old Japan" opera. New York, N. Y.

LACHNER, F.
  1860. Feb. 11. Festival Overture. New York, N. Y.
  1864. Dec. 3. Suite in D minor. New York, N. Y.

LALO, E.
  1884. Dec. 20. Rhapsodie Norvegienne. Boston, Mass.
  1886. Jan. 15. Rhapsodie and Scherzo. New York, N. Y.
  1887. Nov. 12. "Espagnole" symphony. Boston, Mass.
  1890. Jan. 23. "Le Roi d'Ys" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1896. Jan. 4. "Namouna" suite. Boston, Mass.
  1899. Oct. 21. Violoncello Concerto (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1906. Jan. 2. Valse de Cigarette. Boston, Mass.
  1909. Nov. 28. "Arlequin" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.

LAMOND, F.
  1893. Dec. 3. "From the Highlands" overture. Chicago, Ill.

LANG, M. R.
  1893. April 8. "Dramatic Overture." Boston, Mass.
  1893. "Witches" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1895. "Sappho's Prayer." New York, N. Y.

LANGER, F.
  1895. April 13. Introduction to opera "Dornroeschen." Boston, Mass.

LAPARRA, R.
  1910. Dec. 4. "Habanera" opera. Boston, Mass.
  1919. April 18. "Un Dimanche Basque." Boston, Mass.

LAUCELLA, N.
  1911. Nov. 26. "Consalvo" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1915. Jan. 31. Prelude and Temple Dance. New York, N. Y.
  1917. June. "Whitehouse" symphonic impressions. Norfolk, Conn.

LAZZARI, S.
  1910. April 19. "Effet de Nuit" suite. Boston, Mass.
  1911. Jan. 25. Prelude d'Armor. Boston, Mass.
  1911. Jan. 25. "Marche pour une Fete Joyeuse." Boston, Mass.
  1918. Jan. 19. "Le Sauteriot" opera. Chicago, Ill.
  1919. Dec. 19. "Impressions of Night" symphonic picture. New York,
    N. Y.

LE GRAND, H.
  1895. Feb. 21. "The Resurrection" oratorio. New York, N. Y.

LEKEW, G.
  1914. Jan. 25. Adagio for Strings. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Nov. 30. Symphonic Fantasy on Two Angevin Tunes. New York, N. Y.

LEMARE, E.
  1904. Jan. 1. Rhapsody and Caprice Orientale. Pittsburgh, Pa.

LENDVAI, E.
  1913. Feb. 15. Symphony (D major). Boston, Mass.

LEONCAVALLO, R.
  1894. June 15. "Pagliacci" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1913. Mar. 23. "Zingari" opera. Chicago, Ill.
  1920. Jan. 17. "Zaza" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Dec. 13. "Edipo Re" opera. Chicago, Ill.

LEONI, F.
  1915. Jan. 4. "L'Oracolo" opera. New York, N. Y.

LEPS, W.
  1905. Dec. "Andon." Philadelphia, Pa.

LEROUX, X.
  1919. Jan. 24. "La Reine Fiamette" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1919. Jan. 25. "Le Chemineau" opera. Chicago, Ill.

LIADOF, A. C.
  1905. Oct. 27. "Baba Jaga" symphonic poem. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1910. Nov. 16. "Le Lac Enchante" legend. New York, N. Y.
  1910. Nov. 16. "Kikimora" folktale. New York, N. Y.

LIAPONOF, S. M
  1907. Dec. 7. Pianoforte Concerto. New York, N. Y.
  1917. Nov. 17. Second Concerto. New York, N. Y.

LINDNER, A.
  1888. Dec. 29. Violoncello Concerto (Op. 34). Boston, Mass.

LISZT, F.
  1859. April 20. "Les Preludes" symphonic poem, New York, N. Y.
  1860. Dec. 22. "Fest-Klaenge" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1860. Mar. 24. "Tasso" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1869. Jan. 9. "Ce qu'on entend sur le montagne" symphonic poem. New
    York, N. Y.
  1862. April 26. "Orpheus" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1864. Jan 30. "Faust Symphonie." New York, N. Y.
  1865. Nov. 4. "Mazeppa." New York, N. Y.
  1865. Dec. 2. First Pianoforte Concerto (E flat). New York, N. Y.
  1866. Nov. 17. "Naechtliche Zug" from "Faust." New York, N. Y.
  1866. Dec. 8. "Mefisto Waltz." Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1867. July 5. "Vom Fels zum Meer" march. New York, N. Y.
  1868. Jan. 11. "Die Ideale" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1868. April 18. "Heroide Funebre" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1869. April 3. "Prometheus" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1870. May 9. "Goethe March." New York, N. Y.
  1872. Dec. 3. "Hunnenschlacht" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1873. Jan. 18. "Hirtengesang" from "Christus." New York, N. Y.
  1875. May 27. First "Rhapsodie Hongroise." New York, N. Y.
  1875. June 22. Sixth "Rhapsodie Hongroise" (Pester Carneval). New
    York, N. Y.
  1876. Feb. 28. "Christus" oratorio (1st part). New York, N. Y.
  1880. Nov. 19. "Divina Commedia," symphony (1st part). Boston, Mass.
  1882. July 18. Second "Mefisto Waltz." Chicago, Ill.
  1883. Nov. 3. "Rhapsodie Hongroise" (in D). Boston, Mass.
  1884. Feb. 23. Second Pianoforte Concerto (A). Boston, Mass.
  1886. Mar. 16. Pianoforte Concerto "Pathetique." New York, N. Y.
  1888. Feb. 24. "O Salutaris" psalm. New York, N. Y.
  1888. Nov. 10. "St. Francis Assisi's Sermon to the Birds." New York,
    N. Y.
  1891. Nov. 5. "Hungaria" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1894. Jan. 27. "Espagnole" rhapsodie. Boston, Mass.
  1902. Jan. 11. "Toedten-Tanz" pianoforte concerto. Boston, Mass.
  1911. Dec. 11. "Legend of St. Elizabeth" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1917. Dec. 6. Twenty-third Psalm. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Jan. 3. "St. Elizabeth" opera. New York, N. Y.

LITOLFF, H. C.
  1892. Jan. 6. Overture to "King Lear." Boston, Mass.

LOEFFLER, C. M.
  1891. Nov. 21. "Les Veillees de l'Ukraine" suite. Boston, Mass.
  1894. Feb. 3. Concerto Fantastique (cello). Boston, Mass.
  1895. Jan. 5. Divertissement in A minor. Boston, Mass.
  1898. Jan. 8. "Le Mort de Tintagiles" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1901. Jan. 29. "Divertissement Espagnol" for saxophone and orchestra.
    Boston, Mass.
  1902. Feb. 28. "By the Waters of Babylon." Boston, Mass.
  1902. April 12. Two Poems for Orchestra. Boston, Mass.
  1907. Nov. 23. "A Pagan Poem." Boston, Mass.
  1916. June. "Hora Mystica" symphony. Norfolk, Conn.

LONGY, G.
  1903. Jan. 7. "Impression." Boston, Mass.

LOOMIS, C.
  1915. Nov. 9. Pianoforte Concerto. Chicago, Ill.

LUIGINI.
  1901. Jan. 23. "La Voix des Cloches." Boston, Mass.

MacCUNN, H.
  1892. Nov. 11. "Land of the Mountain and the Flood." Chicago, Ill.

MacDOWELL, E.
  1888. April 3. First Pianoforte Concerto (A minor). Boston, Mass.
  1889. Mar. 5. Second Pianoforte Concerto (B minor). New York, N. Y.
  1890. Jan. 11. "Lancelot and Elaine" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1891. Sept. 24. Suite in A minor (Op. 42). Worcester, Mass.
  1896. Jan. 23. "Indian Suite." New York, N. Y.
  1908. Oct. 24. "Lamia" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.

MACKENZIE, A.
  1883. Mar. 3. "Bobbie Burns" Scotch rhapsody. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1885. April 16. "The Rose of Sharon" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1883. Nov. 10. "La Belle Dame sans Merci" ballad. New York, N. Y.
  1889. Mar. 9. "Twelfth Night" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1889. Mar. 14, "Benedictus." New York, N. Y.
  1895. Jan. 25. "Britannia" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1898. Oct. 21. Three Dances from "The Little Minister." Chicago. Ill.
  1901. Sept. 27. "Coriolanus" suite. Worcester, Mass.
  1903. Jan. 31. "Pibroch" suite. Boston, Mass.

MAGNARD, A.
  1905. Dec. 4. "Chant Funebre." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1919. April 11. "Hymne a la Justice." Boston, Mass.

MAHLER, G.
  1904. Nov. 6. Fourth Symphony (G). New York, N. Y.
  1905. Mar. 25. Fifth Symphony. Cincinnati, O.
  1908. Dec. 8. Second Symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Dec. 16. First Symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1916. Mar. 3. Eighth Symphony. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1916. Dec. 14. "Lied von Erde." Philadelphia, Pa.

MALIPIERO, G. F.
  1919. April 4. "Pause del Silenzio." Boston, Mass.
  1920. Dec. 23. "Impression del Vero." Boston, Mass.
  1921. Jan. 10. Grottesco. New York, N. Y.

MANCINELLI, L.
  1899. Mar. 10. "Ero e Leandro" opera. New York, N. Y.

MANDL, R.
  1911. Mar. 4. Overture to a Gascony Comedy. Boston, Mass.

MAQUARRE, A.
  1909. Mar. 27. "On the Sea Cliffs" overture. Boston, Mass.

MARINUZZI, G.
  1920. Nov. 17. "Jacquerie" opera. Chicago, Ill.

MARSCHNER, H.
  1856. April 19. "Hans Heiling." New York, N. Y.
  1895. Mar. 23. Overture to "Hans Heiling." Boston, Mass.

MASCAGNI, P.
  1891. Sept. 9. "Cavalleria Rusticana" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1893. Jan. 31. "L'Amico Fritz" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1902. Oct. 8. "Zanetto" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1902. Oct. 16. "Iris" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1917. Nov. 12. "Isabeau" opera. Chicago, Ill.
  1918. Jan. 12. "Lodoletta" opera. New York, N. Y.

MASON, D. G.
  1916. Feb. 18. First Symphony (C minor). Philadelphia, Pa.
  1914. Nov. 16. Four Songs (baritone and orchestra). Chicago, Ill.
  1921. Mar. 4. Prelude and Fugue. Chicago, Ill.

MASSE, V.
  1861. Oct. 25. "The Marriage of Jeannette" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1886. Dec. 30. "Galatea" opera. Brooklyn, N. Y.

MASSENET, J.
  1874. July 29. "Scenes Pittoresques." New York, N. Y.
  1877. July 20. Variations. Chicago, Ill.
  1882. Feb. 18. "Phedre" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1883. Jan. 20. "Scenes Alsaciennes." Boston, Mass.
  1884. Mar. 8. "Les Erinnyes" entr'acte and finale. Boston, Mass.
  1885. Dec. 23. "Manon" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1886. Oct. 26. "Marche Heroique." New York, N. Y.
  1886. Oct. 28. "La Vierge" for Strings. New York, N. Y.
  1891. Feb. 5. "Eve" cantata. New York, N. Y.
  1891. April 15. "Esclarmonde" suite. Chicago, Ill.
  1892. Feb. 13. "Herodiade" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1893. Feb. 10. "Esclarmonde" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1894. April 20. "Werther" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Nov. 15. "Thais" ballet music. Chicago, Ill.
  1895. Dec. 11. "La Navarraise" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1896. Nov. 7. "Sevigliana" from "Don Cesar de Bazan." Boston, Mass.
  1897. Feb. 12. "Le Cid" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1897. Dec. 13. "Le Portrait de Manon" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1902. April 8. "The Promised Land." Boston, Mass.
  1902. Dec. 23. "Cendrillon" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1904. Nov. 27. Hungarian Scenes. Boston, Mass.
  1906. Jan. 2. "Pastorale Mystique" from "Le Jongleur." Boston, Mass.
  1907. Nov. 25. "Thais" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Nov. 27. "Le Jongleur de Notre Dame" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Nov. 15. "Sappho" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1910. Jan. 10. "Griselidis" opera. New York N. Y.
  1912. Jan. 27. "Don Quichotte" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1916. Jan. 10. "Cleopatre" opera. Chicago, Ill.

MEHUL, E.
  1807. "Une Folie" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1877. July 5. "Horatio Cocles" overture. Chicago, Ill.

MENDELSSOHN, F.
  1838. "St. Paul" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1840. "Elijah" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1844. Nov. 16. "The Hebrides" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1845. April 19. "Melusine" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1845. Nov. 22. "Scotch Symphony." New York, N. Y.
  1846. Jan. 17. Pianoforte Concerto (G minor). New York, N. Y.
  1848. April 14. "Midsummer Night's Dream" Music. New York, N. Y.
  1849. Nov. 24. Violin Concerto. New York, N. Y.
  1850. Jan. 12. "Meerstille" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1850. Jan. 12. Capriccio Brillante. New York, N. Y.
  1851. Nov. 15. "Italian Symphony." Boston, Mass.
  1852. April 17. Pianoforte Concerto (D minor). New York, N. Y.
  1861. April 20. First Walpurgis Night. New York, N. Y.
  1862. Jan. 30. "Hymn of Praise." Boston, Mass.
  1867. Nov. 9. "Trumpet Overture." Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1868. May 9. "Reformation Symphony." Boston, Mass.
  1870. Feb. 22. "Ruy Blas" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1875. May 1. "The Wedding of Camacho." Chicago, Ill.
  1880. Jan. 27. "Lauda Zion." New York, N. Y.
  1887. Jan. 27. "Athalie." Boston, Mass.

MERCADANTE, F. S.
  1832. Oct. 19. "Elise e Claudio" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1847. Feb. 14. "Il Guiramento" opera. New York, N. Y.

MESSAGER, A.
  1920. Jan. 19. "Madame Chrysantheme" opera. Chicago, Ill.

MEYERBEER, G.
  1834. April 7. "Roberto" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1839. April 29. "Les Huguenots" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1850. April 1. "L'Etoile du Nord" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1850. April 2. "Il Profeta" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1862. Nov. 24. "Dinorah" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1865. Dec. 1. "L'Africaine" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1874. Jan. 28. Inauguration March. New York, N. Y.
  1880. Feb. 28. "Struensee Music." New York, N. Y.

MINETTI, C.
  1915. Nov. 9. Prize Aria for tenor and orchestra. Chicago, Ill.

MLYNARSKY, E.
  1906. Mar. 17. Violin Concerto. New York, N. Y.

MOLIQUE, B.
  1867. April 13. Violoncello Concerto. Brooklyn, N. Y.

MONSIGNY, P. A.
  1790-1800. "Le Deserteur" opera. New Orleans, La.

MONTEMEZZI, I.
  1914. Jan. 2. "L'Amore dei Tre Re" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1919. Nov. 18. "La Nave" opera. Chicago, Ill.

MONTEVERDE, C.
  1912. April 14. "Orfeo" opera in concert form. New York, N. Y.

MOOR, E.
  1908. April 18. Pianoforte Concerto (Op. 57). Boston, Mass.
  1921. Mar. 5. Concerto for String Quartet. Chicago, Ill.

MOREAU, L.
  1910. April 19. Pastorale. Boston, Mass.

MORRIS, H.
  1919. Mar. 6. Tone Poem. New York, N. Y.

MOSZKOWSKI, M.
  1887. Mar. 23. First Suite. New York, N. Y.
  1890. Nov. 15. Second Suite. New York, N. Y.
  1892. Oct. 21. "Boabdil" music of. Chicago, Ill
  1893. Jan. 24. "Boabdil" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1894. Feb. 23. Torchlight Dance. Chicago, Ill.
  1910. Feb. 20. Third Suite. New York, N. Y.

MOZART, W. A.
  1823. May 3. "Le Nozze di Figaro" opera in English. New York, N. Y.
  1826. May 23. "Don Giovanni" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1832. Mar. 7. "Die Zauberfloete" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1844. Jan. 15. "Jupiter Symphony." New York, N. Y.
  1847. Nov. 14. Third Symphony (E flat major). New York, N. Y.
  1850. Dec. 21. Symphony in G minor. Boston, Mass.
  1856. Symphony in D major. New York, N. Y.
  1857. Jan. 18. Requiem. Boston, Mass.
  1858. Nov. 23. "Le Nozze di Figaro" (Italian). New York, N. Y.
  1859. Feb. 26. Pianoforte Concerto in E flat. Boston, Mass.
  1861. Mar. 16. Eighth Pianoforte Concerto (D). New York, N. Y.
  1862. Oct. 10. "Die Entfuehrung aus dem Serail" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1865. April 8. Symphony Concertante (piano, violin and viola). New
    York, N. Y.
  1866. Feb. 10. Concerto for Two Pianos (E flat). New York, N. Y.
  1866. Aug. 29. Andante, Variations, Minuetto. New York, N. Y.
  1866. Aug. 29. Turkish March. New York, N. Y.
  1868. Dec. 12. First Three Motets. New York, N. Y.
  1870. Feb. 17. Second Pianoforte Concerto (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1870. Nov. 12. "Die Schauspieldirektor" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1871. May 7. Overture to "Idomeneo." New York, N. Y.
  1871. Nov. 23. Symphony in C. Boston, Mass.
  1872. Mar. 7. Seventh Pianoforte Concerto (C minor). Boston, Mass.
  1873. Mar. 13. Pianoforte Concerto in A. Boston, Mass.
  1875. Aug. 5. Intermezzo and Fugue for strings. New York, N. Y.
  1878. Dec. 19. Pianoforte Concerto in A major. Boston, Mass.
  1881. Mar. 24. Andante and Finale (Serenade No. 12). Boston, Mass.
  1881. April 1. Nocturno from Serenade (Op. 8). New York, N. Y.
  1884. Jan. 12. Concerto for flute and harp. Boston, Mass.
  1885. Nov. 14. "Haffner Serenade." Boston, Mass.
  1888. Mar. 17. Violoncello Concerto (Op. 193). New York, N. Y.
  1895. Oct. 19. Andante and Variations (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1897. Mar. 24. Symphony in A major. New York, N. Y.
  1902. April 1. Adagio and Minuet. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Jan. 18. Three German Dances. Boston, Mass.
  1909. Nov. 7. "Les Petits Riens" ballet music. New York, N. Y.
  1910. Nov. 26. Adagio and Fugue for strings. Boston, Mass.
  1917. Oct. 26. "Bastien et Bastienne" operetta. New York, N. Y.

MRACZEK, J. C.
  1912. Mar. 15. Symphonic Burlesque. Boston, Mass.

MUELLER-BERGHAUS, K.
  1883. Dec. 1. Romance for violoncello. Boston, Mass.

MUSSORGSKY, M. P.
  1893. June. "Une Nuit sur le Mont Chauvee," Chicago, Ill.
  1905. Feb. 25. "Khovanstchina" excerpts from opera. New York, N. Y.
  1913. Mar. 8. "Boris Godunof" opera. New York, N. Y.

NESSLER, V. E.
  1887. Nov. 23. "Der Trompeter von Saekkingen" opera. New York, N. Y.

NEVIN, A.
  1914. Aug. 20. "Love Dreams" suite. Peterboro, N. H.
  1918. Jan. 5. "The Daughter of the Forest" opera. Chicago, Ill.

NICODE, J. L.
  1885. Jan. 10. Symphonic Variations (Op. 27). New York, N. Y.
  1886. Oct. 26. Jubilee March. New York, N. Y.

NICOLAI, O.
  1858. Jan. 9. "The Merry Wives of Windsor" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Jan. 2. Religious Festival Overture, Boston, Mass.

NOREN, H. G.
  1908. Dec. 12. "Kaleidoscope" theme and variations. Boston, Mass.
  1917. April 20. "Vita" symphony. Boston, Mass.

NOSKOWSKI, S.
  1907. Mar. 16. "The Steppe" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.

NOUGUE, J.
  1911. Mar. 25. "Quo Vadis" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.

NOVAK, V.
  1919. Nov. 13. "In the Tatra Mountains" symphonic poem. New York,
     N. Y.

OFFENBACH, J.
  1867. April. "La Grande Duchesse" opera bouffe. New York, N. Y.
  1882. Oct. 16. "Les Contes d'Hoffman" opera. New York, N. Y.

OLDBERG, A.
  1907. Jan. 17. "Paolo and Francesca" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1912. May. Symphonic Variations. Evanston, Ill.

PACINI, G.
  1834. July 12. "Gli Arabi nelli Gallie" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1847. June 12. "Saffo" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1860. Sept. 27. "Medea" opera. New York, N. Y.

PADEREWSKI, I. J.
  1891. Mar. 14. Pianoforte Concerto (A minor). Boston, Mass.
  1895. Nov. 4. Polish Fantasia. New York, N. Y.
  1902. Feb. 14. "Manru" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Feb. 13. Symphony (B minor), Boston, Mass.

PAGANINI, N.
  1898. Jan. 15. Caprice in A minor, for violin. Boston, Mass.

PAINE, J. K.
  1873. June. "St. Peter" oratorio. Portland, Me.
  1876. Jan. 26. First Symphony. Boston, Mass.
  1876. May 11. Centennial Hymn. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1880. Mar. 10. "Spring Symphony." Cambridge, Mass.
  1883. Mar. 10. "The Tempest" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1883. May 2. "The Nativity" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1889. April 20. "An Island Fantasy." Boston, Mass.
  1892. Oct. 22. Columbus March and Hymn. Chicago, Ill.
  1900. Mar. 10. "Azara" ballet music. Boston, Mass.
  1907. April 9. "Azara" opera. Boston, Mass.

PAISIELLO, G.
  1794. "Il Barbiere di Seviglia" opera. Baltimore, Md.

PALMGREN, S.
  1917. Nov. 30. Second Symphony. Chicago, Ill.

PARKER, H. W.
  1886. Jan. 30. Scherzo for Orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1890. Dec. 10. "Count de Paris" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1893. May 3. "Hora Novissima" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Mar. 30. Rhapsody for baritone and orchestra. Boston, Mass.
  1898. April 15. "St. Christopher" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1899. Dec. 30. "Northern Ballad." Boston, Mass.
  1902. Dec. 27. Organ Concerto (E flat). Boston, Mass.
  1908. June. Ballad for chorus and orchestra. Norfolk, Conn.
  1911. Mar. 14. "Mona" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1911. June. "Collegiate" overture. Norfolk, Conn.
  1915. July 1. "Fairyland." Los Angeles, Cal.
  1918. Jan. 5. "Dream of Mary" cantata. Norfolk, Conn.

PARKER, J. C. D.
  1877. May 17. "Redemption Hymn" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1890. April 8. "St. John" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1895. April 14. "The Life of Man" oratorio. Boston, Mass.

PAULY, F.
  1914. April 2. Pianoforte Concerto (E flat). Minneapolis, Minn.

PAUR, E.
  1909. Jan. 15. Symphony (A major). Pittsburgh, Pa.

PELLESIER
  1796. Dec. 19. "Edwin and Angelina" ballad opera. New York, N. Y.
  1799. "The Vintage" ballad opera. New York, N. Y.

PERELLI, A.
  1911. Mar. 6. "A Lover's Quarrel" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.

PERI, A.
  1863. Nov. 11. "Judith" opera. New York, N. Y.

PERKINS, C. C.
  1850. Mar. 23. Grand Symphony. Boston, Mass.
  1855. Feb. 17. The Pilgrim's Cantata. Boston, Mass.

PEROSI, L.
  1899. April 24. "The Transfiguration" opera. Boston, Mass.

PESSARD, F.
  1900. Feb. 11. "Danses Espagnoles." Boston, Mass.

PETRELLA, E.
  1863. Mar. 7. "Ione" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1867. April 3. "Il Carnival de Venezia" opera. New York, N. Y.

PFITZNER, H.
  1907. Nov. 15. "Christelflein" overture. Boston, Mass.

PHELPS E. C.
  1880. May 10. "Hiawatha" symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1885. Mar. 31. "American Legend." New York, N. Y.
  1889. Aug. "Elegy." Brighton Beach, N. Y.
  1890. Dec. 10. "Meditation." New York, N. Y.

PICK-MANGIALLI
  1920. Dec. 2. "Il Carillon Magico." New York, N. Y.

PIERNE, G.
  1906. Dec. 4. "La Croisade des Enfants" (The Children's Crusade)
    oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Dec. 19. "Les Enfants a Bethleem" (The Children at Bethlehem)
    oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1910. Jan. 26. "Ramuntcho." Boston, Mass.
  1913. Oct. 2. "St. Francis d'Assisi" oratorio. Worcester, Mass.

PIZZETTI, I.
  1919. April 9. "Fedra" prelude to Act I. Philadelphia, Pa.

PONCHIELLI, A.
  1871. Dec. 20. "La Gioconda" opera. New York, N. Y.

POWELL, J.
  1918. Mar. 3. "The Fair" suite. New York, N. Y.

PRAEGER, F. C. W.
  1888. April 14. "Life and Love, Battle and Victory" symphonic poem.
    New York, N. Y.

PRATT, S.
  1886. Mar. 23. "Court Minuet." New York, N. Y.

PROKOFIEV, S.
  1918. Dec. 6. First Pianoforte Concerto. Chicago, Ill.
  1918. Dec. 6. "Scythian Suite." Chicago, Ill.
  1919. Dec. 11. Classical Symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Dec. 30. "Love for Three Oranges" opera. Chicago, Ill.

PUCCINI, G.
  1894. Aug. 29. "Manon Lescaut" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1898. May 16. "La Boheme" opera. San Francisco, Cal.
  1901. Feb. 4. "La Tosca" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Nov. 12. "Madama Butterfly" opera. Washington, D. C.
  1908. Dec. 17. "Le Villi" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1910. Dec. 10. "La Fanciulla" (The Girl of the Golden West) opera. New
    York, N. Y.
  1918. Dec. 14. "Il Tabarro" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Dec. 14. "Gianni Schicchi" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Dec. 14. "Suor Angelica" opera. New York, N. Y.

RABAUD, H.
  1900. Nov. 30. "La Procession Nocturne" symphonic poem. Cincinnati, O.
  1902. April 1. Fantasia sur Chansons Russes. Boston, Mass.
  1904. Jan. 5. "Poeme Virgilien." Boston, Mass.
  1908. Jan. 21. Second Symphony. Boston, Mass.
  1917. Dec. 19. "Marouf" opera. New York, N. Y.

RACHMANINOF, S. V.
  1903. "The Cliff" tone poem. New York, N. Y.
  1904. Nov. 19. Dances from "Aleko." New York, N. Y.
  1904. Dec. 17. Pianoforte Concerto (F sharp minor). Boston, Mass.
  1905. Nov. 18. Second Pianoforte Concerto. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Dec. 20. "Tzigane" capriccio. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Jan. 14. Second Symphony (E minor). New York, N. Y.
  1909. Nov. 28. Third Pianoforte Concerto. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Dec. 3. "The Isle of the Dead" tone poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1911. Feb. 16. Fantasia (pianoforte and orchestra). New York, N. Y.
  1918. Jan. 19. "Veralize." New York, N. Y.
  1919. Jan. 28. First Pianoforte Concerto. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Feb. 6. Third Symphony "The Bells." Philadelphia, Pa.

RAFF, J.
  1865. Feb. 18. "An Das Vaterland" symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1867. Jan. 12. Second Suite (C. Op. 101). New York, N. Y.
  1870. Jan. 8. Second Symphony (C). New York, N. Y.
  1871. Dec. 6. Third Symphony (F). Boston, Mass.
  1872. Aug. 1. "Dame Kobold" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1872. Dec. 14. Fourth Symphony (G). New York, N. Y.
  1873. Dec. 5. Fifth Symphony "Lenore" (E). Boston, Mass.
  1874. Nov. 14. Pianoforte Concerto (Op. 185). New York, N. Y.
  1875. Jan. 8. Sixth Symphony (D minor). New York, N. Y.
  1875. June 24. Sinfonietta for wind instruments. New York, N. Y.
  1876. Feb. 26. Suite in F. New York, N. Y.
  1877. Nov. 20. Suite for pianoforte and orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1882. Jan. 29. "Die Tageszeiten" (piano, chorus and orchestra). New
    York, N. Y.
  1886. Mar. 20. "Die Jahreszeiten." Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1886. Nov. 4. Festival March. New York, N. Y.
  1890. Nov. 20. "Romeo and Juliet" overture. Boston, Mass.

RAMEAU, J. P.
  1877. July 20. "Romanesca." Chicago, Ill.
  1885. Feb. 7. Gavotte, Tambourine, and Minuet from "Castor and
    Pollux." New York, N. Y.
  1895. Nov. 1. Suite de Ballet "Acanthe and Cephise." New York, N. Y.
  1900. April 7. Ballet Suite. Boston, Mass.
  1904. April 11. "Les Indes Galantes" ballet. Boston, Mass.

RAVEL, M.
  1909. Nov. 12. Rhapsodie Espagnole. Chicago, Ill.
  1912. Nov. 8. "Ma Mere l'Oye" suite. New York, N. Y.
  1913. Dec. 27. "Juon" fantasy. Boston, Mass.
  1913. Dec. 27. "Vaegtervise" (Watchman's Song). Boston, Mass.
  1914. Nov. 29. "Daphnis and Chloe" (symphonic fragments). New York,
    N. Y.
  1915. Oct. 22. "Daphnis and Chloe" (more fragments). New York, N. Y.
  1916. Oct. 26. "Valses Nobles et Sentimentales." New York, N. Y.
  1916. Dec. 3. Intermezzo and Allegro for harp and orchestra. New York,
    N. Y.
  1920. Jan. 5. "L'Heure Espagnol" opera. Chicago, Ill.
  1921. Feb. 16. "Alborada del Gracioso." Boston, Mass.
  1921. Oct. 28. "La Valse." San Francisco, Cal.

REGER, M.
  1907. April 13. Serenade (Op. 95). Boston, Mass.
  1907. Dec. 20. Variations and Fugue (Op. 100). Philadelphia, Pa.
  1908. April 7. Violin Sonata (unaccompanied). New York, N. Y.
  1909. Oct. 16. Prologue to a Tragedy. Boston, Mass.
  1911. Sept. 27. "The Nuns." Worcester, Mass.
  1911. Oct. 7. A Comedy Overture. Boston, Mass.
  1912. April 7. "Romantic Suite." New York, N. Y.
  1912. April 7. "Ballet Suite." New York, N. Y.
  1912. Nov. 19. Concerto in Ancient Style. New York, N. Y.
  1915. Mar. 27. First Tone Poem (Op. 126). Boston, Mass.

REINECKE, C.
  1868. May 24. "King Manfred" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1871. June 13. Festival Overture. New York, N. Y.
  1872. Jan. 6. Pianoforte Concerto (F sharp minor). New York, N. Y.
  1874. Aug. 13. "In Memoriam." New York, N. Y.
  1887. Nov. 12. "Ein Feste Burg" variations. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Mar. 23. "Der Gouverneur von Tours" entr'acte. Boston, Mass.

REINHOLD, H.
  1883. Jan. 10. Concert Overture. New York, N. Y.
  1886. Jan. 23. Prelude, Minuet and Fugue, for Strings. Boston, Mass.

RESPIGHI, O.
  1919. Feb. 13. "Fontana di Roma" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Feb. 3. Four Songs of the Sixteenth Century. New York, N. Y.

REYER, L.
  1888. Dec. 8. "The Waking of the Valkyrie." New York, N. Y.
  1891. Dec. 25. "Sigurd" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1900. Jan. 25. "Salammbo" opera. New Orleans, La.

REZNICEK, E. N. von
  1895. Dec. 7. "Donna Diana" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1907. Nov. 23. Adagio, Scherzo, and Finale from Suite in E minor.
    Boston, Mass.
  1914. April 25. "Schlemihl" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.

RHEINBERGER, J.
  1871. Aug. 10. "Wallenstein's Camp." New York, N. Y.
  1881. Mar. 11. "Demetrius" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1883. Jan. 31. Symphony in F. Boston, Mass.
  1888. April 14. Passacaglia. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Feb. 22. Organ Concerto in G minor. Chicago, Ill.

RHENE-BATON
  1911. Jan. 25. Variations. Boston, Mass.

RIEMENSCHNEIDER, A.
  1893. Mar. 4. "Toedtentanz." Boston, Mass.

RICCI, L.
  1844. Oct. "Chiara de Rosenberg" opera. New York, N. Y.

RIESENFELD, H.
  1920. Feb. 6. Overture in Romantic Style. New York, N. Y.

RIMSKY-KORSAKOF, N. A.
  1891. Dec. 8. Second Symphony "Antar." New York, N. Y.
  1897. Jan. 8. "Mlada" suite. Chicago, Ill.
  1897. April 17. "Scheherazade" suite. Boston, Mass.
  1897. Oct. 23. "La Grande Paque Russe" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1901. Jan. 11. Fantaisie de Concert. New York, N. Y.
  1902. Nov. 15. "To the Betrothed of the Tsar" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1904. Nov. 19. "Mlada" third act from ballet. New York, N. Y.
  1904. Dec. 24. "May Night" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1905. Jan. 21. "Tsar-Saltan" suite. New York, N. Y.
  1905. Feb. 3. Pianoforte Concerto (C sharp minor). Philadelphia, Pa.
  1905. Mar. 25. "Sadko" musical picture. Boston, Mass.
  1905. Nov. 18. "Snow Maiden" suite. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Feb. 15. Caprice on Spanish Themes. Boston, Mass.
  1909. Nov. 7. Russian Song. New York, N. Y.
  1916. Feb. 17. Serbian Fantaisie. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Jan. 19. "Le Coq d'Or" four tableaux. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Mar. 6. "Le Coq d'Or" opera. New York, N. Y.

RITTER, A.
  1903. Jan. 30. "Olaf's Wedding Dance" symphonic waltz. Chicago, Ill.

RITTER, F. L.
  1867. Dec. 21. "Othello" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1881. Feb. 17. Second Symphony. Boston, Mass.

ROENTGEN, J.
  1896. Dec. 11. Ballad on Norwegian Folk Song. Chicago, Ill.

ROGERS, B.
  1919. Nov. 13. "To the Fallen" dirge. New York, N. Y.

ROPARTZ, J. G.
  1905. April 29. Fantaisia (D major). Boston, Mass.
  1914. Feb. 12. "La Chasse du Prince Arthur" symphonic poem. New York,
     N. Y.
  1914. Oct. 24. Fourth Symphony (C major). Boston, Mass.
  1920. Oct. 22. "Divertissement." Boston, Mass.

ROSSINI, G. A.
  1819. "The Barber of Seville" (English). New York, N. Y.
  1825. Nov. 26. "Il Barbiere di Seviglia" (Italian). New York, N. Y.
  1825. Dec. 31. "Tancredi" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1826. "Il Turco in Italia" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1826. "La Cenerentola" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1826. April 25. "Semiramide" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1832. "L'Inganno Felice" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1832. Nov. 5. "L'Italiana in Algieri." opera. New York, N. Y.
  1832. Dec. 22. "Mose in Egitto" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1833. Mar. 13-20. "Otello" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1833. Nov. 18. "La Gazza Ladra" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1834. Mar. 21. "La Donna del Lago" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1834. Mar. 24. "Matilda de Shabran" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1834. Nov. 25. "Edouardo e Cristina" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1835. Feb. 6. "L'Assedio di Corinto" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1842. Dec. 13. "Guillaume Tell" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1843. Feb. 26. "Stabat Mater." Boston, Mass.
  1871. May 3. "Messe Solennelle." Boston, Mass.

ROUSSEL, A.
  1912. Mar. 11. "Poeme de la Foret." Boston, Mass.
  1914. Jan. 2. "La Ville Rose" Evocation. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1914. Oct. 23. "La Festin de l'Araignee." New York, N. Y.

ROUSSEAU
  1790-1800. "Pygmalion." New Orleans, La.
  1790-1800. "Devin du Village." New Orleans, La.

RUBINSTEIN, A.
  1869. Jan. 16. "Faust" picture. New York, N. Y.
  1871. Jan. 7. "Ocean" symphony (C). New York, N. Y.
  1871. July 19. "Demitri Donskoi" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1871. Dec. 2. Pianoforte Concerto (D minor). Boston, Mass.
  1872. May 30. "Don Quixote" humoresque. New York, N. Y.
  1874. Jan. 24. "Ivan IV" character sketch. New York, N. Y.
  1874. Sept. 17. Overture Triomphale. New York, N. Y.
  1875. Mar. 4. Fourth Symphony "Dramatic" (D minor). New York, N. Y.
  1881. April 2. "The Demon" ballet music. Boston, Mass.
  1881. May 1. "The Tower of Babel" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1881. July 16. "Nero" ballet music. New York, N. Y.
  1881. Dec. 10. Fifth Symphony (G minor). New York, N. Y.
  1882. Dec. 15. "La Russie" morceau symphonique. New York, N. Y.
  1883. July 18. "Bal Costume" first series. Chicago, Ill.
  1884. Dec. 20. "La Vigne" ballet music. Boston, Mass.
  1885. April 28. "Fantasia Eroica." Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1886. July 5. "Bal Costume" second series. Chicago, Ill.
  1887. Mar. 12. "Paradise Lost" sacred opera. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1887. Mar. 14. "Nero" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1887. April 23. Sixth Symphony (A minor). New York, N. Y.
  1888. Feb. 16. Second Violoncello Concerto. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1891. Jan. 17. "Anthony and Cleopatra" overture. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1894. May 25. Second and third tableaux from "Moses." Cincinnati, O.
  1905. April 1. Romance and Caprice Russe. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Dec. 10. Pianoforte Fantasia in C major, New York, N. Y.
  1908. Dec. 19. Fifth Pianoforte Concerto (E flat). Boston, Mass.

RUSSELL, L. A.
  1887. Nov. 15. "Pastoral." New York, N. Y.

SAAR, V. L.
  1916. April 23. "Suite Rococo." Cincinnati, O.

SABATA, V. di
  1918. Dec. 8. Symphonic Suite. New York, N. Y.
  1919. Mar. 23. "Juventus" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.

SAINT-SAENS
  1874. May 21. Marche Heroique. New York, N. Y.
  1875. June 3. "Le Rouet d'Omphale." New York, N. Y.
  1876. Jan. 29. "Danse Macabre." New York, N. Y.
  1876. Feb. 3. Second Pianoforte Concerto (G minor). Boston, Mass.
  1876. Feb. 17. Violoncello Concerto (A minor). Boston, Mass.
  1876. Oct. 9. "Phaeton" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1877. Mar. 1. Third Pianoforte Concerto (E flat). Boston, Mass.
  1877. Mar. 15. "Samson et Dalila" ballet music. St. Louis, Mo.
  1877. July 24. Suite in B major (Op. 49). Chicago, Ill.
  1877. Nov. 14. "La Jeunesse d'Hercule" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1878. Feb. 14. Fourth Pianoforte Concerto (C). Boston, Mass.
  1880. May 7. "Le Deluge" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1881. Mar. 22. "Suite Algerienne." Boston, Mass.
  1881. Dec. 1. Pianoforte Concerto. Boston, Mass.
  1881. Dec. 6. "La Lyre et la Harpe" cantata. Providence, R. I.
  1883. Dec. 22. "Henry VIII" ballet music. Boston, Mass.
  1886. Jan. 2. "Rhapsodie d'Auvergne." Boston, Mass.
  1887. Feb. 19. Third Symphony (C minor). New York, N. Y.
  1890. Jan. 4. Third Violin Concerto (B minor). Boston, Mass.
  1892. Oct. 22. Second Symphony (A minor). Boston, Mass.
  1893. Jan. 4. "Samson et Dalila" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1894. Feb. 7. Morceau de Concert. Boston, Mass.
  1898. Mar. 7. Fifth Pianoforte Concerto (F). Chicago, Ill.
  1900. April 27. "La Princesse Jaune." Boston, Mass.
  1902. Oct. 31. "Les Barbares" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1904. Nov. 26. First Symphony (E flat). Boston, Mass.
  1906. Nov. 3. "Africa" fantasia. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Oct. 9. "La Fiancee du Timbalier" ballad. Boston, Mass.
  1910. Oct. 6. "Occident and Orient" march. New York, N. Y.
  1911. Jan. 25. Ouverture de Fete. Boston, Mass.
  1912. Mar. 3. Hymn to Pallas Athene. New York, N. Y.
  1915. Dec. 9. "Dejanire" opera. Chicago, Ill.

SALVIONI
  1833. Mar. 22. "La Casa da Vendere" opera. New York, N. Y.

SATIE, E.
  1905. Jan. 4. "Gymnopedies" (Nos. 1 and 2). Boston, Mass.

SAUER, E.
  1908. Oct. 17. First Pianoforte Concerto. Boston, Mass.

SAXE COBURG GOTHA, DUKE OF
  1891. Jan. 9. "Diana von Solange" opera. New York, N. Y.

SCHARWENKA, P.
  1887. July 28. "Libesnacht" fantasie. Chicago, Ill.
  1888. Jan. 28. "Arkadische" suite. New York, N. Y.
  1892. Jan. 29. "Fruehlingswogen." Chicago, Ill.

SCHARWENKA, X.
  1883. Feb. 1. Pianoforte Concerto. New York, N. Y.
  1885. Dec. 12. Symphony (C minor). New York, N. Y.
  1896. Feb. 13. "Mataswintha," opera in concert form. New York, N. Y.
  1907. April 1. "Mataswintha" opera stage performance. New York, N. Y.
  1911. Feb. 11. Fourth Pianoforte Concerto (F minor). Boston, Mass.

SCHEINPFLUG, P.
  1909. Jan. 23. Overture to a Comedy of Shakespeare. Boston, Mass.

SCHILLING, E.
  1908. Jan. 25. Fantastic Suite for piano and orchestra. Boston, Mass.
  1912. Oct. 30. Legende Symphonique. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1915. Dec. 31. "Impressions" theme and variations. Boston, Mass.
  1916. Oct. 20. Violin Concerto. Boston, Mass.

SCHILLINGS, M.
  1902. Mar. 1. Symphonic Prologue to "Oedipus Rex." Boston, Mass.
  1904. Nov. 11. "The Witch Song." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1906. April 7. "The Piper's Holiday" prelude to Act III. Boston, Mass.
  1909. Jan. 16. "The Harvest Festival" from "Moloch." Boston, Mass.
  1910. Feb. 15. "Meerguss" symphonic fantasy. St Paul, Minn.

SCHJELDERUP
  1908. Feb. 15. "Sunrise on the Himalayas" symphonic poem. Boston,
    Mass.
  1908. Feb. 15. "Summer Night on the Fjord" symphonic poem. Boston,
    Mass.

SCHMIDT, F.
  1912. Mar. 11. Rhapsodie Viennoise. Boston, Mass.
  1913. Nov. 11. Tragedy of Salome. Boston, Mass.
  1913. Dec. 18. Psaume XLVI. Boston, Mass.
  1916. Jan. 23. "Pupazzi." New York, N. Y.
  1921. April 27. "Chant du Guerre." Boston, Mass.

SCHNEIDER, E. F.
  1915. Aug. 7. "Apollo" opera. Bohemian Grove, Cal.

SCHNEIDER, F.
  1854. April 22. Twentieth Symphony. New York, N. Y.

SCHOENBERG, A.
  1912. Oct. 30. Five Pieces for orchestra. Chicago, Ill.
  1915. Nov. 5. "Kammer Symphony." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1915. Nov. 18. "Pelleas et Melisande" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.

SCHOLTZ, B.
  1886. Mar. 13. Symphony in B flat. New York, N. Y.
  1893. Nov. 16. "Wanderings" suite. Chicago, Ill.

SCHUBERT, F.
  1851. Jan. 11. Symphony in C. New York, N. Y.
  1862. Mar. 8. Grand Fantasia. Boston, Mass.
  1859. Jan. 8. "Fierabras" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1866. Oct. 27. Reiter March. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1867. Mar. 13. "Rosamunde" entr'acte. New York, N. Y.
  1867. July 7. "Rosamunde" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1867. Oct. 26. Unfinished Symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1868. Dec. 12. Twenty-third Psalm. New York, N. Y.
  1869. Feb. 6. Symphony in B minor. New York, N. Y.
  1869. May 12. "Italian Overture." New York, N. Y.
  1871. Aug. 17. March in B minor. New York, N. Y.
  1871. Nov. 9. "Alfonse and Estrella" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1875. May 27. Impromptu in C minor. New York, N. Y.
  1875. May 28. "Teufel's Lustschloss." New York, N. Y.
  1875. Aug. 10. Octet for Strings. New York, N. Y.
  1875. Aug. 20. Tenth Symphony (C). New York, N. Y.
  1875. Dec. 27. Pianoforte Sonata (orchestrated by Joachim). Boston,
    Mass.
  1876. Jan. 6. "Marche Heroique." Boston, Mass.
  1885. Oct. 31. "Trauermarsch." Boston, Mass.
  1888. Jan. 17. Divertissement a la Hongroise. New York, N. Y.
  1888. Nov. 24. Overture in F minor. Boston, Mass.
  1889. Mar. 30. Overture in B. Boston, Mass.

SCHULTZ, L.
  1904. American Festival Overture. St. Louis, Mo.
  1918. Dec. 3. American Rhapsody. New York, N. Y.

SCHUMANN, G.
  1900. Oct. 19. Symphonic Variations. Chicago, Ill.
  1903. Dec. 26. Variationen und Doppel Fugue. Chicago, Ill.
  1910. Feb. 7. "Ruth" cantata. Chicago, Ill.

SCHUMANN, R.
  1853. Jan. 11. First Symphony (B flat). Boston, Mass.
  1848. April 11. "Paradise and the Peri." New York, N. Y.
  1854. Jan. 14. Second Symphony (C). New York, N. Y.
  1857. Feb. 7. Fourth Symphony (D minor). New York, N. Y.
  1856. April 27. "Manfred" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1858. April 24. Overture, Scherzo and Finale. New York, N. Y.
  1859. Mar. 26. Pianoforte Concerto (A minor). New York, N. Y.
  1861. Feb. 2. Third Symphony (E flat). New York, N. Y.
  1861. Mar. 16. "Genoveva" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1865. April 8. "Die Braut von Messina" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1866. Aug. 13. "Traumerei." New York, N. Y.
  1869. May 8. "Manfred," music of. New York, N. Y.
  1875. May 27. "Bilder aus Oesten." New York, N. Y.
  1875. Dec. 4. Concertstuecke (Op. 92). New York, N. Y.
  1881. Mar. 28. Scenes from "Faust." Boston, Mass.
  1884. Nov. 22. Pictures from the Orient. Boston, Mass.
  1886. Nov. 4. "Marche Funebre." New York, N. Y.
  1889. Mar. 28. Fantasia for violin. New York, N. Y.
  1899. Mar. 13. "Gypsy Life." New York, N. Y.
  1901. Mar. 30. "Julius Caesar" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1903. Mar. 14. "The Dawn of Love" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1904. Jan. 23. "In Carnival Time" suite. Boston, Mass.
  1906. April 17. Two pieces in Canon Form. Boston, Mass.

SCHYTTE, L.
  1886. July 21. "Pantomimes." Chicago, Ill.

SCOTT, C.
  1920. Nov. 5. Pianoforte Concerto in C. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1920. Nov. 5. Two Passacaglias. Philadelphia, Pa.

SCRIABIN, A.
  1900. Dec. 2. Reverie. Cincinnati, O.
  1906. Dec. 20. Pianoforte Concerto. New York, N. Y.
  1907. Feb. 28. First Symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1907. Mar. 14. Third Symphony "Peace Divine." New York, N. Y.
  1908. Dec. 10. Fourth Symphony "Ecstasy." New York, N. Y.
  1915. Mar. 5. "Prometheus--Poem of Fire." New York, N. Y.

SEIFERT, U.
  1875. Jan. 15. Festival March. New York, N. Y.

SEROF, A. N.
  1906. Mar. 17. Cossack Dances. New York, N. Y.

SEVERN
  1915. Jan. 17. Violin Concerto. New York, N. Y.

SGAMBATI, G.
  1884. Dec. 6. Symphony in D major. New York, N. Y.
  1890. Nov. 1. Pianoforte Concerto (G minor). Boston, Mass.
  1893. Dec. 28. "Te Deum." Chicago, Ill.

SHELLEY, H. R.
  1887. July. Dance of Egyptian Maidens. New York, N. Y.
  1888. Mar. 2. Grand Sonata. New York, N. Y.
  1891. Feb. 23. Violin Concerto. New York, N. Y.
  1893. July 7. Carnival Overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1893. July 19. "The Ruined Castle" suite. Chicago, Ill.
  1897. June 25. Symphony in E flat. New York, N. Y.
  1901. Jan. 27. "Santa Claus" overture. New York, N. Y.

SHEPHERD, A.
  1906. Mar. 10. Overture Joyeuse. New York, N. Y.
  1916. Feb. 11. Overture "The Festival of Youth." St. Louis, Mo.

SIBELIUS, J.
  1901. Dec. 7. Two Legends from "Kalevala." Chicago, Ill.
  1902. Jan. 31. "Journeys Homewards" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1902. Nov. 14. "King Christian II" suite. Opus 27. Chicago, Ill.
  1903. Feb. 7. "The Swan of Tuonela" symphonic poem. Cincinnati, O.
  1904. Jan. 2. Second Symphony (D major). Chicago, Ill.
  1904. April 30. "Eine Saga" tone poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1905. Dec. 24. "Finlandia" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Nov. 30. Violin Concerto (D minor). New York, N. Y.
  1907. Jan. 5. First Symphony (E minor). Boston, Mass.
  1907. Jan. 17. "Karelia" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1907. Feb. 7. "Karelia" suite. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Jan. 16. Third Symphony (C major). New York, N. Y.
  1908. Nov. 21. "A Spring Day" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1913. Mar. 2. Fourth Symphony (A minor). New York, N. Y.
  1914. June. "Aalloteret" tone poem. Norfolk, Conn.
  1917. Jan. 12. "Polyola's Daughter" symphonic fantasy. Boston, Mass.
  1917. Jan. 12. "Night Ride and Sunrise" symphonic poem, Boston, Mass.

SIMANDL, F.
  1905. Jan. 20. Concert Piece for double bass and orchestra.
    Pittsburgh, Pa.

SINDING, C.
  1893. Dec. 9. First Symphony (D minor). Chicago, Ill.
  1900. Jan. 5. Rondo Infinito. Chicago, Ill.
  1900. Jan. 19. Episodes Chevaleresques. Chicago, Ill.
  1900. Mar. 10. Violin Concerto (A major). New York, N. Y.

SINGER, O.
  1869. April 3. Fantasia for pianoforte and orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1878. May 14. Festival Ode. Cincinnati, O.

SINIGAGLIA, L.
  1911. Mar. 11. "Le Baruffe Chiozzotte" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1916. Nov. 26. Etude Caprice. New York, N. Y.

SITT, H.
  1905. Jan. 4. Andante (violin and orchestra). Boston, Mass.

SIX RUSSIAN COMPOSERS
  1903. Oct. 24. Variations on a Russian Theme. Chicago, Ill.

SKILTON, C. S.
  1916. Oct. 29. Two Indian Dances. Minneapolis, Minn.

SLAVINSKY
  1918. Jan. 19. "The Shepherdess and the Faun." New York, N. Y.

SMAREGLIA, A.
  1890. Dec. 12. "Der Vassall von Szigeth" opera. New York, N. Y.

SMETANA, F.
  1887. Nov. 12. "Prodana nev[ve]sta" overture (The Bartered Bride). New
    York, N. Y.
  1890. Nov. 22. "Ultava" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1895. Oct. 25. "Sarka" symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1896. April 24. "Vysehrad" symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1896. Nov. 13. "Richard III" symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1897. Jan. 2. "Wallenstein's Lager" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1900. Dec. 8. "Ma Vlast" (My Country) symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1905. Oct. 21. "Libussa" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1909. Feb. 19. "Prodana Nev[ve]sta" opera. New York, N. Y.

SMITH, D. S.
  1912. Dec. 14. Symphony in F minor. Cincinnati, O.
  1918. May 30. Rhapsody of St. Bernard. Evanston, Ill.
  1918. June 4. Second Symphony (D major). Norfolk, Conn.
  1918. Nov. 17. "Impressions" orchestral suite. Minneapolis, Minn.

SOWERBY, L.
  1917. Jan. 18. "Comes Autumn Time" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1918. Feb. 15. "A Set of Four." Chicago, Ill.
  1920. Mar. 5. Pianoforte Concerto in F major. Chicago, Ill.

SPARCKS, G.
  1905. Jan. 4. "Boabdil" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1906. Jan. 2. "Legende" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.

SPENDIAROF, A.
  1914. Feb. 17. "The Three Palms" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Jan. 19. "The Sermon of Resia" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.

SPINELLI, N.
  1900. Jan. 22. "A Basso Porto" opera. New York, N. Y.

SPOHR, L.
  1842. Mar. 20. "The Last Judgment" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1844. Mar. 16. Symphony in D minor. New York, N. Y.
  1845. Jan. 11. "Jessonda" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1846. Feb. 14. "Faust" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1848. April 29. Symphony in E flat. New York, N. Y.
  1853. Nov. 26. Ninth Symphony "The Seasons." New York, N. Y.
  1860. Jan. 14. Double Symphony. Boston, Mass.
  1875. Feb. 20. Third Symphony. New York, N. Y.

SPONTINI, G.
  1881. Jan. 6. "Ferdinand Cortes" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1884. Jan. 26. "Olympia" overture. Boston, Mass.

STAHLBERG, F.
  1902. Jan. 3. "Die Brautschau" suite. Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1903. Mar. 14. "To the Memory of Abraham Lincoln" tone poem.
    Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1904. Jan. 8. Suite (Op. 10). Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1908. Mar. 23. "Ueber's Weltenmeer" suite. New York, N. Y.
  1912. Feb. 4. "Im Hochland." New York, N. Y.
  1912. Mar. 16. Symphonic Scherzo. New York, N. Y.
  1916. Feb. 4. Suite (Op. 33). New York, N. Y.

STANFORD, C. V.
  1884. Jan. 19. Serenade in G. New York, N. Y.
  1888. Jan. 28. Irish Symphony. New York, N. Y.
  1915. June. Pianoforte Concerto. Norfolk, Conn.
  1917. June. Irish Rhapsody. Norfolk, Conn.
  1918. June 6. "Verdun" tone poem. Norfolk, Conn.

STENHAMMER, W.
  1914. Jan. 6. "Midwinter." Minneapolis, Minn.

STOCK, F.
  1904. Feb. 26. Symphonic Variations. Chicago, Ill.
  1907. Nov. 1. Symphonic Waltz. Chicago, Ill.
  1911. Feb. 27. Suite for strings. St. Louis, Mo.
  1915. June. Violin Concerto. Norfolk, Conn.
  1918. Mar. 15. Overture to a Romantic Comedy. Chicago, Ill.
  1919. Feb. 28. March and Hymn to Democracy. Chicago, Ill.
  1921. May 26. A Psalmodic Rhapsody. Evanston, Ill.

STOJOWSKI, S.
  1915. Feb. 5. Suite for orchestra. New York, N. Y.

STRACKOSCH, M.
  1851. Jan. 3. "Giovanni di Napoli" opera. New York, N. Y.

STRANSKY, J.
  1911. Feb. 27. Symphonic Song. New York, N. Y.
  1913. Feb. 27. "Moonrise" and "Requiem." New York, N. Y.
  1921. Jan. 13. "Thy Fragrant Hair" song, and "Hymnus." New York, N. Y.

STRAUSS, J.
  1867. July 1. "Blue Danube" waltz. New York, N. Y.
  1867. July 7. "From the Mountains" waltz. New York, N. Y.
  1867. July 14. "Buergesum" waltz. New York, N. Y.
  1867. July 14. "Lob der Frauen" polka mazurka. New York, N. Y.
  1869. July 20. "Wein, Weib, und Gesang" waltz. New York, N. Y.
  1885. Mar. 16. "Die Fledermaus" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1892. Oct. 21. "Seid Umschlungen Millionen Waltz." Chicago, Ill.
  1895. April 13. "Moto Perpetuo" musical joke. Boston, Mass.

STRAUSS, R.
  1884. Dec. 13. Symphony (F minor). New York, N. Y.
  1888. Mar. 8. "Italy" symphonic fantasia. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1891. Oct. 31. "Don Juan" tone poem. Boston, Mass.
  1892. Jan. 9. "Tod und Verklaerung" tone poem. New York, N. Y.
  1892. April 1. "Macbeth" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Nov. 1. "Guntram" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1895. Nov. 1. "Guntram" prelude to act III. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Nov. 15. "Til Eulenspiegel" tone poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1897. Feb. 5. "Also sprach Zarathustra" tone poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1899. Jan. 7. "Don Quixote" tone poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1900. Mar. 10. "Ein Heldenleben" tone poem. Chicago, Ill.
  1902. Feb. 14. "Feuernot" love scene. Chicago, Ill.
  1903. April 18. Burlesque in D minor, piano and orchestra. Boston,
    Mass.
  1904. Mar. 21. "Sinfonia Domestica." New York, N. Y.
  1905. April 14. "Taillefer" choral ballad. New York, N. Y.
  1907. Jan. 22. "Salome" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1910. Jan. 29. "Elektra" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1912. Nov. 13. Festival Prelude. New York, N. Y.
  1913. April 17. "Der Abend." New York, N. Y.
  1913. Dec. 9. "Der Rosenkavalier" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1916. April 25. "Alpine Symphony." Cincinnati, O.
  1921. Feb. 12. Suite from "Der Buerger als Edelman." Boston, Mass.

STRAVINSKY, I.
  1910. Dec. 1. "Feuerwerk." New York, N. Y.
  1916. Jan. 15. First Symphony (E flat). New York, N. Y.

STRONG, T.
  1885. Mar. 31. "Undine" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1887. Nov. 24. Symphony (F major). New York, N. Y.

STRUBE, G.
  1895. Feb. 16. "The Maid of Orleans" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1896. April 4. Symphony (C minor). Boston, Mass.
  1897. Sept. 22. Violin Concerto (G major). Worcester, Mass.
  1898. Jan. 27. Overture for trumpets, horns, tubas and kettledrums.
    Boston, Mass.
  1901. April 20. Rhapsody (Op. 17). Boston, Mass.
  1903. Jan. 25. "Hymn to Eros." Boston, Mass.
  1904. Mar. 18. Fantastic Overture. Boston, Mass.
  1905. April 22. "Longing" symphonic poem. Boston, Mass.
  1905. Dec. 23. Violin Concerto (F sharp minor). Boston, Mass.
  1908. Mar. 28. Fantastic Dance. Boston, Mass.
  1909. April 3. Symphony (B minor). Boston, Mass.
  1910. Mar. 19. "Puck" comedy overture. Boston, Mass.
  1913. Jan. 25. "Narcissus" and "Echo" symphonic poems. Boston, Mass.
  1913. Nov. 21. "Loreley" symphonic poem. St. Louis, Mo.
  1920. Nov. 12. Four Preludes. Boston, Mass.

SUK, J.
  1900. Nov. 16. Symphony (E major). New York, N. Y.
  1901. Nov. 22. "Pohadka." Chicago, Ill.
  1906. Feb. 11. Scherzo. New York, N. Y.

SULLIVAN, A.
  1874. July 16. "The Tempest" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1877. June 6. "On Shore and Sea" cantata. Chicago, Ill.
  1879. Feb. 23. "The Prodigal Son" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1886. Nov. 4. "In Memoriam" overture. Chicago, Ill.
  1887. May 8. "The Golden Legend" oratorio. Boston, Mass.
  1910. Feb. 13. "The Golden Legend" oratorio. Boston, Mass.

SVENDSEN, J.
  1873. June 12. First Symphony (D). New York, N. Y.
  1873. Sept. 18. "Sigurd Slambe" symphonic overture. New York, N. Y.
  1880. April 4. "Zorahayda" legende. Boston, Mass.
  1881. Mar. 11. "Romeo and Juliet" fantasia. Boston, Mass.
  1884. Jan. 5. Second Symphony (B flat). Boston, Mass.
  1886. Jan. 12. Norwegian Artist's Carnival. New York, N. Y.
  1887. Mar. 1. Festival Polonaise. New York, N. Y.

SWEET, R.
  1921. Mar. 4. "Riders to the Sea" overture. New York, N. Y.

TANAIEF, S.
  1900. Dec. 1. Symphony in C. Boston, Mass.
  1904. Mar. 3. First Symphony. New York, N. Y.

TAUBERT, K. G. W.
  1872. Mar. 7. "Arabian Nights" overture. Boston, Mass.

TAUBMANN, O.
  1913. Mar. 28. "A Choral Service." New York, N. Y.

TAVAN, E.
  1900. April 27. "Noce Arabe." Boston, Mass.

TAYLOR, COLERIDGE
  1900. Mar. 14. "The Song of Hiawatha" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1900. Dec. 5. "Hiawatha's Departure." Boston, Mass.
  1903. Feb. 13. Ballad in D minor. Chicago, Ill.
  1910. June. "Bamboula" dance. Norfolk, Conn.
  1912. June. Violin Concerto. Norfolk, Conn.
  1912. June. Negro Air. Norfolk, Conn.
  1912. June. "A Tale of Old Japan." Norfolk, Conn.
  1914. June. "From the Prairie." Norfolk, Conn.

TEN BRINK, J.
  1904. April 11. Premiere Suite d'Orchestre. Boston, Mass.

THOMAS, A.
  1859. "Le Caid" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1871. Nov. 22. "Mignon" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1872. Mar. 22. "Hamlet" opera. New York, N. Y.

THOMAS, G.
  1898. Feb. 26. "The Swan and the Skylark" cantata. New York, N. Y.
  1900. Nov. 19. "Esmeralda" opera. New York, N. Y.

THUILLE, L.
  1911. Nov. 18. "Lobetanz" opera. New York, N. Y.

TIERSOT, J.
  1906. Jan. 2. "Danses Populaires Francaises." Boston, Mass.

TINEL, E.
  1893. Mar. 17. "St. Francis d'Assisi." New York, N. Y.
  1907. Feb. 9. "Polyeucte" three symphonic pictures. Boston, Mass.

TIRINDELLI, P.
  1906. Jan. 26. "Tragi-commedia" symphonic poem. Cincinnati, O.

TOMMASINI, V.
  1919. Mar. 17. "Claire de Lune" nocturne. New York, N. Y.

TOWNSEND, M. L.
  1912. Feb. 11. Serenade. New York, N. Y.

TSCHEREPIN, N.
  1918. Mar. 23. "Fire Bird." New York, N. Y.

TURINA, J.
  1919. Nov. 13. "La Procession del Racio." New York, N. Y.

URACK, O.
  1914. Mar. 7. First Symphony (E major). Boston, Mass.

URSPRUCH, A.
  1903. Jan. 2. "Der Sturm" overture. Chicago, Ill.

VAN der PALS
  1911. Dec. 17. "Autumn," "Spring" symphonic pieces. New York, N. Y.

VAN der STUCKEN, F.
  1900. July. "Pax Triumphans" festival prologue. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1901. Feb. 2. "William Ratcliffe" symphonic prologue. Boston, Mass.

VERDI, G.
  1847. Mar. 3. "I Lombardi" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1847. April 15. "Ernani" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1847. "I due Foscari" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1848. April 4. "Nabucco" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1850. April 16. "Attila" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1850. April 24. "Macbeth" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1852. Oct. 27. "Luisa Miller" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1855. April 30. "Il Trovatore" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1855. Oct. 30. "Semiramide" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1856. Dec. 3. "La Traviata" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1859. Nov. 7. "I Vespri Sicilienne" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1860. Mar. 19. "Rigoletto" opera. New Orleans, La.
  1860. May 30. "I Masnadieri" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1861. Feb. 11. "Un Ballo in Maschera" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1863. April 15. "Aroldo" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1865. Feb. 24. "La Forza del Destino" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1873. Nov. 26. "Aida" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1875. Nov. 17. "Requiem." Boston, Mass.
  1877. April 12. "Don Carlos" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1888. April 16. "Otello" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Feb. 4. "Falstaff" opera. New York, N. Y.

VIDAL, P.
  1918. Nov. 9. "Danses Tanagreennes." New York, N. Y.

VIEUXTEMPS, H.
  1867. Dec. 14. Violin Concerto in D. Brooklyn, N. Y.

VIVALDI, A.
  1913. Mar. 8. Concerto (G minor). Boston, Mass.

VOLBACH, F.
  1903. Jan. 23. "Es Waren Zwei Koenigskinder." Chicago, Ill.
  1910. Jan. 18. Symphony (B minor). Philadelphia, Pa.

VOLKMANN, R.
  1842. Jan. 10. Serenade in F. New York, N. Y.
  1869. April 3. Festival Overture. New York, N. Y.
  1874. Jan. 10. Serenade in D minor. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1883. Dec. 22. Symphony in B flat (Second). Boston, Mass.
  1885. Mar. 14. "Richard III" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1884. Feb. 3. Violoncello Concerto. Boston, Mass.

VREUILS, V.
  1921. Mar. 4. "Jour de Fete" symphonic poem. Cincinnati, O.

WAGNER, R.
  1853. Nov. 19. "Rienzi" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1857. Jan. 3. "Faust" overture. Boston, Mass.
  1859. Nov. 19. "Lohengrin" prelude. Boston, Mass.
  1859. April 4. "Tannhaeuser" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1859. Aug. 27. "Lohengrin" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1862. May 13. "Die Fliegende Hollaender" music. New York, N. Y.
  1866. Mar. 10. "Tristan und Isolde" introduction. New York, N. Y.
  1866. Oct. 20. "Die Meistersinger" vorspiel. New York, N. Y.
  1855. Mar 10. "Die Meistersinger" selections. New York, N. Y.
  1871. June 22. "Kaiser March." New York, N. Y.
  1871. Sept. 8. "Huldigung's March." New York, N. Y.
  1871. Dec. 6. "Tristan und Isolde" introduction and finale. New York,
    N. Y.
  1872. Sept. 17. "The Ride of the Valkyries." New York, N. Y.
  1873. Jan. 8. "Wotan's Departure." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1873. Jan. 8. "Magic Fire Music." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1873. Sept. 14. "Die Walkuere" introduction and love scene. New York,
    N. Y.
  1876. May 11. Centennial March. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1877. Nov. 8. "Il Vascello Fantasma," "Die Fliegende Hollaender," "The
    Flying Dutchman" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1877. April 2. "Die Walkuere" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1878. Feb. 28. "Siegfried Idyll." New York, N. Y.
  1878. Mar. 5. "Rienzi" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1880. "Die Goetterdaemmerung" (third act). New York, N. Y.
  1882. Nov. 3. "Parsifal" finale first act. New York, N. Y.
  1882. Nov. 3. "Parsifal" "Procession of knights." New York, N. Y.
  1882. Nov. 3. "Parsifal"--"Monologue of Amfortas." New York, N. Y.
  1882. Nov. 3. "Parsifal"--"The Lord's Supper." New York, N. Y.
  1882. Nov. 3. "Parsifal"--"The Holy Grail." New York, N. Y.
  1882. Nov. 11. "Parsifal" vorspiel. New York, N. Y.
  1883. Feb. 16. "Parsifal"--"Good Friday Spell." New York, N. Y.
  1886. Jan. 4. "Die Meistersinger" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1886. Dec. 1. "Tristan und Isolde" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1887. Feb. 24. "Parsifal"--"Flowergirl Music." New York, N. Y.
  1887. Nov. 9. "Siegfried" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1888. Jan. 4. "Das Rheingold" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1888. Jan. 15. "Die Goetterdaemmerung" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1888. Feb. 25. Symphony in C. New York, N. Y.
  1889. Jan. 17. "Traueme." Chicago, Ill.
  1903. Jan. 30. Coronation March. Chicago, Ill.
  1903. Dec. 24. "Parsifal" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Feb. 14. "Christopher Columbus" overture. Philadelphia, Pa.

WAGNER, S.
  1898. Jan. 7. "Sehnsucht" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1899. Nov. 4. "Der Baerenhaeuter" overture. Boston, Mass.

WALLACE, W. V.
  1848. May 4. "Maritana" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.

WALLACE, W.
  1910. Oct. 6. "Villon" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.

WEBBER, A.
  1905. Dec. 30. Symphony (E minor). Boston, Mass.

WEBER, C. M. von
  1825. Mar. 12. "Der Freischuetz" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1827. Oct. 9. "Oberon" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1842. Feb. 26. Jubilee Overture. Boston, Mass.
  1863. "Euryanthe" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1866. Feb. 10. "Invitation to the Dance." New York, N. Y.
  1874. May 14. "Abu Hassan" overture. New York, N. Y.
  1875. June 17. First Symphony (C). New York, N. Y.
  1887. Dec. 23. "Euryanthe" opera (revival). New York, N. Y.
  1888. Nov. 10. "The Three Pintos" entr'acte. New York, N. Y.
  1914. Dec. 4. "Euryanthe" opera (noted revival). New York, N. Y.

WEIDIG, A.
  1900. Jan. 5. Scherzo Capriccioso. Chicago, Ill.
  1906, Mar. 2. "Semiramis" symphonic fantaisie. Chicago, Ill.
  1919. Feb. 23. Concert Overture. Minneapolis, Minn.

WEINGARTNER, F.
  1898. April 7. "The Elysian Fields" symphonic poem. New York, N. Y.
  1901. April 13. Symphony (G major). Boston, Mass.
  1902. Dec. 5. Second Symphony (E flat). New York, N. Y.
  1911. Dec. 28. Third Symphony (F major). New York, N. Y.
  1912. Nov. 4. "Lustige" overture. New York, N. Y.

WEISS, K.
  1921. Mar. 9. "The Polish Jew" opera. New York, N. Y.

WETZLER, H. H.
  1921. Nov. 13. Overture to "As You Like It." San Francisco, Cal.

WHITING, A.
  1887. Nov. 17. Pianoforte Concerto (D minor). New York, N. Y.
  1847. Mar. 6. Fantasy for piano and orchestra (B flat minor). Boston,
    Mass.

WIDOR, C. M.
  1902. Nov. 28. Chorale and Variations for harp and orchestra. Chicago,
    Ill.
  1904. April 14. "Ouverture Espagnol." Boston, Mass.
  1917. Feb. 2. Third Symphony for organ. New York, N. Y.
  1917. Dec. 14. Prelude. Chicago, Ill.

WILSON, M.
  1920. Oct. "New Orleans" overture. New York, N. Y.

WILLIAMS, R. V.
  1920. Dec. 31. "A London Symphony." New York, N. Y.

WITKOWSKI, G. M.
  1903. April 4. Symphony (D minor). Boston, Mass.

WOLF-FERRARI, E.
  1907. Dec. 4. "Vita Nuova" oratorio. New York, N. Y.
  1911. Mar. 24. "The Secret of Suzanne" opera. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1912. Jan. 16. "Le Donne Curiose" opera. New York, N. Y.
  1912. Jan. 16. "I Giojelli della Madonna" (The Jewels of the Madonna)
    opera. Chicago, Ill.
  1914. Mar. 25. "L'Amore Medico" opera. New York, N. Y.

WOLFF, A.
  1919. Dec. 27. "The Blue Bird" opera. New York, N. Y.

WOOLLETT, H.
  1911. Jan. 25. "Siberia." Boston, Mass.

WOYRSCH, F.
  1911. April 10. Symphony (D minor). Chicago, Ill.

YON, P.
  1921. Feb. 6. Concerto Gregoriano. New York, N. Y.

YSAYE, E.
  1905. Mar. 30. Poeme Elegiaque for violin and orchestra. New York,
    N. Y.
  1918. May 9. "Exil" symphonic poem. Cincinnati, O.

YSAYE, TH.
  1915. Jan. 8. Fantasia on Walloon Theme. St. Louis, Mo.

ZANDONAI
  1913. Feb. 6. "Conchita." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1914. Jan. 20. "O Padre Nostro" from "Purgatory." New York, N. Y.
  1916. Dec. 22. "Francesca da Rimini." New York, N. Y.

ZELLNER, H.
  1896. Feb. 22. Orchestral Fantasia. Boston, Mass.
  1896. Dec. 11. "Midnight at Sedan" symphonic poem. Chicago, Ill.

ZELLNER, J.
  1873. June 12. Symphony (Op. 7). New York, N. Y.
  1874. Aug. 21. "Melusine." New York, N. Y.

ZOLOTAREF
  1905. Dec. 30. "Rhapsodie Hebraique." New York, N. Y.




MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS


BALLAD OPERAS, ETC.
  1733. "Hob in the Well." Charleston, S. C.
  1750. April 30. "The Mock Doctor." New York, N. Y.
  1750. Dec. 3. "The Beggar's Opera." New York, N. Y.
  1757. "The Masque of Alfred." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1770. "The Masque of Comus." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1787. "The Duenna." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1787. "The Maid of the Mill." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1790. June 14. "The Mistress and Maid." Baltimore, Md.
  1790. Oct. 7. "Le Tonnelier." New York, N. Y.
  1790-1800. Various French Operas. New Orleans, La.
  1790-1800. Various French Operas. Norfolk, Conn.
  1790-1800. Various French Operas. Charleston, S. C.
  1790-1800. Various French Operas. Richmond, Va.
  1790-1800. Various French Operas. Boston, Mass.
  1790-1800. Various French Operas. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1790-1800. Various French Operas. New York, N. Y.
  1794. "The Barber of Seville" (Paisiello). New York, N. Y.
  1796. April 18. "The Archers of Switzerland." New York, N. Y.
  1796. Dec. 19. "Edwin and Angelina." New York, N. Y.
  1797. Jan. 25. "Richard Coeur de Lion." Boston, Mass.
  1798. Jan. 29. "The Purse." New York, N. Y.
  1799. "The Vintage." New York, N. Y.
  1823. "Clari--The Maid of the Mill." New York, N. Y.


CONCERTS
  1731. Mr. Pelham's. Boston, Mass.
  1732. Mr. Salter's. Charleston, S. C.
  1733. Song Recital. Charleston, S. C.
  1736. Mr. Pachelbel's. New York, N. Y.
  1761. Mr. Dipper's. Boston, Mass.
  1765. Musical Glasses. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1765. Ranelagh Gardens. New York, N. Y.
  1786. Reformed Church. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1789. Mr. Graupner's. Salem, Mass.
  1798. Columbia Garden. New York, N. Y.
  1798. Albany. Albany, N. Y.
  1798. Trenton. Trenton, N. J.
  1798. Salem. Salem, Mass.
  1800. Philharmonic Society, New York, N. Y.
  1801. University of Pennsylvania. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1821. Musical Fund. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1848. Convention. Chicago, Ill.
  1849. Saengerfest. Cincinnati, O.
  1850. Philharmonic Orchestra. Chicago, Ill.
  1850. Symphony Concert. Chicago, Ill.
  1860. Briggs House. Chicago, Ill.
  1864. Band Festival. New Orleans, La.
  1865. Peabody Institute. Baltimore, Md.
  1866. Summer Nights'. New York, N. Y.
  1869. First Peace Jubilee. Boston, Mass.
  1877. Summer Nights'. Chicago, Ill.
  1881. Philharmonic Society. Boston, Mass.


CONDUCTORS (Orchestral)
  1855. Carl Zerrahn. Boston, Mass.
  1856. Carl Bergmann. New York, N. Y.
  1860 and 1880. Hans Balatka. Chicago, Ill.
  1868 and 1877. Theodore Thomas. New York, N. Y.
  1871. A. Hamerik. Baltimore, Md.
  1878. Dr. Leopold Damrosch. New York, N. Y.
  1885. Walter Damrosch. New York, N. Y.
  1889. Carl Venth. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1891. Theodore Thomas. Chicago, Ill.
  1893. Frederic Archer. Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1895. F. van der Stucken. Cincinnati, O.
  1895. Fritz Scheel. San Francisco, Cal.
  1898. Victor Herbert. Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1900. Fritz Scheel. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1901. L. Stokowski. Cincinnati, O.
  1903. Guest Conductors. New York, N. Y.
  1904. Guest Conductors. New York, N. Y.
  1904. Emil Paur. Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1905. Guest Conductors. New York, N. Y.
  1905. Fred A. Stock. Chicago, Ill.
  1905. Walter Rothwell. Minneapolis, Minn.
  1906. E. B. Emanuel. St. Paul, Minn.
  1907. Carl Pohlig. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1907. Max Zach. St. Louis, Mo.
  1908. M. Kregizi. Seattle, Wash.
  1908. W. B. Rothwell. St. Paul, Minn.
  1909. Henry K. Hadley. Seattle, Wash.
  1911. Henry K. Hadley. San Francisco, Cal.
  1911. Carl Busch. Kansas City, Mo.
  1912. L. Stokowski. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1912. Ernest Kunwald. Cincinnati, O.
  1914. Glenn Dillard Gunn. Chicago, Ill.
  1914. Carl Venth. Dallas, Texas.
  1915. Alfred Hertz. San Francisco, Cal.
  1915. Gustav Strube. Baltimore, Md.
  1917. Nov. 17. P. Monteux. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Feb. 21. Henri Verbrugghen. New York, N. Y.
  1918. N. Sokolov. Cleveland, O.
  1918. Ossip Gabrilowitsch. Detroit, Mich.
  1920. Dec. 30. Albert Coates. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Nov. 6. Rudolf Ganz. St. Louis, Mo.

        Boston Symphony Orchestra, Boston, Mass.
  1881-1884. Georg Henschel
  1884-1889. Wilhelm Gericke
  1889-1893. Arthur Nikisch
  1893-1898. Emil Paur
  1898-1906. Wilhelm Gericke
  1906-1908. Dr. Karl Muck
1908-1912. Max Fiedler
  1912-1917. Dr. Karl Muck
  1917-1918. Henri Rabaud
  1918-      Pierre Monteux

        Philharmonic Society, New York, N. Y.
  1849-1855. U. C. Hill  }
             H. C. Timms }
             W. Alpers   }
             G. Loder    }  alternating
             L. Wiegers  }
             Th. Eisfeld }
  1855-1866. Th. Eisfeld and Carl Bergmann
  1866-1876. Carl Bergmann
  1876-1877. Dr. Leopold Damrosch
  1877-1891. Theodore Thomas
  1891-1898. Anton Seidl
  1898-1902. Emil Paur
  1902-1903. Walter Damrosch
  1903-1905. Guest Conductors
  1905-1908. Willy Safonof
  1908-1911. Gustav Mahler
  1911-      Josef Stransky


CONSERVATORIES AND SCHOOLS OF MUSIC
  1750. Collegium Musicum. Bethlehem, Pa.
  1833. Academy of Music. Boston, Mass.
  1834. Miss Wyeth's School. Chicago, Ill.
  1851. Tourjee's School. Providence, R. I.
  1865. Peabody Conservatory. Baltimore, Md.
  1865. Oberlin Conservatory. Oberlin, O.
  1867. Boston Conservatory. Boston, Mass.
  1867. New England Conservatory. Boston, Mass.
  1867. Cincinnati Conservatory. Cincinnati, O.
  1867. Academy of Music (became Chicago Musical College). Chicago, Ill.
  1871. Illinois College Conservatory. Jacksonville, Ill.
  1873. Northwestern University Conservatory. Evanston, Ill.
  1877. Syracuse University Conservatory. Syracuse, N. Y.
  1878. College of Music. Cincinnati, O.
  1884. Chicago Conservatory. Chicago, Ill.
  1885. American Institute of Applied Music. New York, N. Y.
  1886. American Conservatory. Chicago, Ill.
  1905. Institute of Musical Art. New York, N. Y.


DEBUTS, Pianists
  1844. Leopold von Meyer. New York, N. Y.
  1845. Henry Herz. New York, N. Y.
  1848. Richard Hoffman. New York, N. Y.
  1852. Oct. 15. Alfred Jaell. New York, N. Y.
  1853. Louis M. Gottschalk. New York, N. Y.
  1855. Sigismund Thalberg. New York, N. Y.
  1862. Teresa Carreno. New York, N. Y.
  1869. Dec. 2. Anna Mehlig. Farmington, Conn.
  1870. Marie Krebs. New York, N. Y
  1872. Sept. 23. Anton Rubinstein. New York, N. Y.
  1873. Julie Rive-King. Cincinnati, O.
  1875. Oct. 4. Arabella Goddard. New York, N. Y.
  1875. Oct. 18. Hans von Buelow. Boston, Mass.
  1876. Nov. 14. Annette Essipof. New York, N. Y.
  1879. Oct. 13. Rafael Joseffy. New York, N. Y.
  1883. Jan. 11. Fannie Bloomfield Zeisler. Chicago, Ill.
  1883. Dec. 8. Helen Hopekirk. Boston, Mass.
  1887. Nov. 27. Josef Hofmann. New York, N. Y.
  1888. Nov. 13. Moritz Rosenthal. New York, N. Y.
  1890. Leopold Godowski. New York, N. Y.
  1891. Jan. 23. Xaver Scharwenka. New York, N. Y.
  1891. Nov. 13. Ferruccio Busoni. Boston, Mass.
  1891. Nov. 18. Ignace Jan Paderewski. New York, N. Y.
  1892. Feb. 6. Vladimir de Pachmann. New York, N. Y.
  1893. Dec. 2. Richard Burmeister. New York, N. Y.
  1893. Dec. 5. Josef Slivinski. New York, N. Y.
  1893. Dec. 9. Alberto Jonas. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Alfred Reisenauer. New York, N. Y.
  1897. Dec. 10. Raoul Pugno. New York, N. Y.
  1898. Jan. 25. Alexander Siloti. New York, N. Y.
  1899. Mar. 22. Ernest Dohnanyi. New York, N. Y.
  1899. Nov. 3. Mark Hambourg. New York, N. Y.
  1900. Nov. 12. Ossip Gabrilowitch. New York, N. Y.
  1900. Dec. 1. Harold Bauer. Boston, Mass.
  1906. Jan. 9. Rudolph Ganz. Boston, Mass.
  1906. Jan. 27. Josef Lhevinne. New York, N. Y.
  1907. Jan. 19. Katherine Goodson. Boston, Mass.
  1909. Nov. 4. Serge Rachmaninof. Northampton, Mass.
  1911. Dec. 10. Arthur Shattuck. New York, N. Y.
  1912. Jan. 7. William Bachaus. New York, N. Y.
  1913. Jan. 16. Max Pauer. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Oct. 20. Alfred Cortot. New York, N. Y.
  1919. Feb. 12. Winifred Christie. New York, N. Y.
  1919. Nov. 29. Benno Moseivitch. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Jan. 21. C. Valderranea. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Nov. 5. Cyril Scott. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1920. Nov. 21. E. Nyiregyhasi. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Jan. 14. Ignaz Friedman. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Oct. 15. Elly Ney. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Nov. 28. Alfredo Casella. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Dec. 25. Artur Schnabel. New York, N. Y.


DEBUTS, Singers
  1793. Mrs. Broadhurst. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1794. Mrs. Oldmixon. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1817. Oct. 3. Charles B. Incledon. New York, N. Y.
  1825. Nov. 26. Manuel Garcia. New York, N. Y.
  1825. Nov. 26. F. Garcia (Malibran). New York, N. Y.
  1831. Miss Hughes. New York, N. Y.
  1832. Sept. 25. Signora Pedrotti. New York, N. Y.
  1832. Sept. 25. Signor Fornisari. New York, N. Y.
  1832. Sept. 25. Signor Montresor. New York, N. Y.
  1833. Sept. 25. Mr. and Mrs. Wood. New York, N. Y.
  1834. Mar. 28. Clementina Fanti. New York, N. Y.
  1834. Mar. 28. Clotilde Fanti. New York, N. Y.
  1835. April 8. Charlotte Cushman. Boston, Mass.
  1837. Oct. 30. Maria Caradori-Allan. New York, N. Y.
  1838. Mr. and Mrs. Seguin. New York, N. Y.
  1841. John Braham. New York, N. Y.
  1841. The Hutchinson Family.
  1844. Feb. 2. Signora Borghese. New York, N. Y.
  1847. April 15. Fortunata Tedesco. New York, N. Y.
  1847. Aug. 4. Madame Anna Bishop. New York, N. Y.
  1847. Nov. 22. Teresa Truffi. New York, N. Y.
  1847. Dec. 1. Amalia Patti. New York, N. Y.
  1847. Dec. 8. Eliza Biscaccianti. New York, N. Y.
  1848. Rosina Laborde. New York, N. Y.
  1849. Dec. 10. Giuletta Perrini. New York, N. Y.
  1850. Mar. 11. Signora Steffanone. New York, N. Y.
  1850. Mar. 18. Angiolina Bosio. New York, N. Y.
  1850. Sept. 11. Jenny Lind. New York, N. Y.
  1850. Nov. 4. Teresa Parodi. New York, N. Y.
  1851. Sept. 23. Catherine Hayes. New York, N. Y.
  1851. Dec. 7. Marietta Alboni. New York, N. Y.
  1853. Jan. 10. Henrietta Sontag. New York, N. Y.
  1853. Jan. 12. Signor Rocco. New York, N. Y.
  1854. Oct. 2. Grisi and Mario. New York, N. Y.
  1854. Oct. 9. Louisa Fanny Pyne. New York, N. Y.
  1855. Feb. 13. Felicita Vestvali. New York, N. Y.
  1855. Mar. 12. Luigi Brignoli. New York, N. Y.
  1855. May 8. Anna de la Grange. New York, N. Y.
  1855. Oct. 1. Constance Nantier-Didier. New York, N. Y.
  1856. Mar. 17. Adelaide Phillips. New York, N. Y.
  1857. Feb. 28. Marietta Gazzaniga. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1857. Nov. 2. Madame d'Angri. New York, N. Y.
  1857. Nov. 30. Carl Formes. New York, N. Y.
  1857. Dec. 30. Anna Caradori. New York, N. Y.
  1858. Oct. 20. Maria Piccolomini. New York, N. Y.
  1859. Nov. 24. Adelina Patti. New York, N. Y.
  1860. Sept. 19. Pauline Colson. New York, N. Y.
  1861. Jan. 23. Isabella Hinkley. New York, N. Y.
  1861. Feb. 27. Clara Louise Kellogg. New York, N. Y.
  1862. Sept. 22. Carlotta Patti. New York, N. Y.
  1864. Nov. 4. Jennie van Zandt. New York, N. Y.
  1865. Sept. 11. Euphrosyne Parepa-Rosa. New York, N. Y.
  1866. Oct. Minnie Hauck, New York, N. Y.
  1870. Sept. 19. Christine Nilsson. New York, N. Y.
  1871. Sept. 18. Theodore Wachtel. New York, N. Y.
  1872. Feb. 14. Charles Santley. New York, N. Y.
  1872. Sept. 30. Pauline Lucca. New York, N. Y.
  1873. Oct. 1. Italo Campanini. New York, N. Y.
  1873. Oct. 3. Victor Maurel. New York, N. Y.
  1873. Oct. 6. Enrico Tamberlik. New York, N. Y.
  1873. Oct. 7. Ilma di Murska. New York, N. Y.
  1874. Emy Fursch-Madi. New Orleans, La.
  1875. Oct. 18. Eugenie Pappenheim. New York, N. Y.
  1875. Oct. 21 Emma Albani (also 1883). New York, N. Y.
  1876. Jan. 24. Therese Tietjens. New York, N. Y.
  1876. Jan. 25. Teresa Carreno (as singer). New York, N. Y.
  1876. April 17. Anna de Belocca. New York, N. Y.
  1877. Feb. 23. Emma Abbott. New York, N. Y.
  1878. Feb. 11. Hermine Rudersdorff. New York, N. Y.
  1878. Nov. 11. Etelka Gerster. New York, N. Y.
  1879. Oct. 22. Alwina Valleria. New York, N. Y.
  1879. Dec. 3. Marie Marimon. New York, N. Y.
  1880. Jan. 19. Castelmary (Count de Castan). New York, N. Y.
  1880. Oct. 4. Georg Henschel. New York, N. Y.
  1880. Oct. 18. Luigi Ravelli. New York, N. Y.
  1882. Dec. 20. Sophia Scalchi. New York, N. Y.
  1883. Oct. 24. Marcella Sembrich. New York, N. Y.
  1883. Oct. 26. Alberto Stagno. New York, N. Y.
  1883. Nov. 26. Lillian Nordica. New York, N. Y.
  1884. Jan. 14. Marianne Brandt. New York, N. Y.
  1884. Nov. 21. Madame Schroeder-Hanfstaengl. New York, N. Y.
  1884. Nov. 24. Emma Nevada. New York, N. Y.
  1884. Nov. 27. Augusta Seidl-Krauss. New York, N. Y.
  1884. Nov. 27. Anton Schott. New York, N. Y.
  1885. Jan. 5. Amalie Materna. New York, N. Y.
  1885. Nov. 4. Felia Litvinne. New York, N. Y.
  1885. Nov. 25. Lilli Lehmann. New York, N. Y.
  1885. Nov. 25. Max Alvary. New York, N. Y.
  1886. Jan. 20. William Candidus. New York, N. Y.
  1886. Nov. 10. Albert Niemann. New York, N. Y.
  1890. Mar. 24. Francesco Tamagno. New York, N. Y.
  1891. Nov. 14. Emma Eames. New York, N. Y.
  1891. Dec. 14. Jean de Reszke. New York, N. Y.
  1891. Dec. 14. Edouard de Reszke. New York, N. Y.
  1891. Dec. 21. Marie van Zandt. New York, N. Y.
  1892. Jan. 15. Jean Lasalle. New York, N. Y.
  1893. Nov. 27. Pol Plancon. New York, N. Y.
  1893. Nov. 29. Emma Calve. New York, N. Y.
  1893. Dec. 4. Nellie Melba. New York, N. Y.
  1893. Dec. Sigrid Arnoldson. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Jan. 15. Sybil Sanderson. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Mar. 1. Johanna Gadski. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Nov. 29. Guiseppe Cremonini. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Dec. 17. Yvette Guilbert. New York, N. Y.
  1896. Feb. 4. Milka Ternina. New York, N. Y.
  1896. Jacques Bars. New York, N. Y.
  1896. Aug. David Bispham. New York, N. Y.
  1898. Nov. 7. Ernestine Schumann-Heink. Chicago, Ill.
  1898. Nov. 8. Albert Saleza. Chicago, Ill.
  1898. Nov. 29. Ernest van Dyck. New York, N. Y.
  1898. Dec. 14. Anton van Rooy. New York, N. Y.
  1899. Jan. 4. Suzanne Adams. New York, N. Y.
  1899. Feb. 7. Albert Alvarez. Boston, Mass.
  1899. Dec. 23. Antonio Scotti. New York, N. Y.
  1900. Jan. 24. Fritz Friedrichs. New York, N. Y.
  1900. Nov. 12. Charles Gilibert. San Francisco, Cal.
  1900. Nov. 13. Robert Blass. San Francisco, Cal.
  1900. Nov. 14. Louise Homer. San Francisco, Cal.
  1900. Nov. 14. Imbart de la Tour. San Francisco, Cal.
  1900. Nov. 17. Marcel Journet. San Francisco, Cal.
  1900. Nov. 19. Fritzi Scheff. San Francisco, Cal.
  1901. Jan. 14. Margaret McIntyre. New York, N. Y.
  1901. Jan. 16. Lucienne Breval. New York, N. Y.
  1902. Dec. 19. Madame Kirkby Lunn. New York, N. Y.
  1903. Nov. 23. Enrico Caruso. New York, N. Y.
  1903. Nov. 25. Olive Fremstad. New York, N. Y.
  1903. Edythe Walker. New York, N. Y.
  1904. Luisa Tetrazzini. San Francisco, Cal.
  1905. Nov. 25. Jeanne Jomelli. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Nov. 20. Florencio Constantino. New Orleans, La.
  1906. Nov. 20. Andrea de Segurola. New Orleans, La.
  1906. Nov. 20. Fely Dereyne. New Orleans, La.
  1906. Nov. 20. Riccardo Martin. New Orleans, La.
  1906. Nov. 26. Geraldine Farrar. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Dec. 3. Alessandro Bonci. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Dec. 5. Maurice Renaud. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Dec. 5. Lina Cavalieri. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Dec. 7. Pauline Donalda. New York, N. Y.
  1907. Feb. 1. Mario Sammarco. New York, N. Y.
  1907. Nov. 4. Jeanne Gerville-Reache. New York, N. Y.
  1907. Nov. 20. Feodor Chaliapin. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Mar. 4. Berta Morena. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Sept. 5. Blanche Arral. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Nov. 9. Maria Labia. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Nov. 14. Ludwig Wuellner. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Nov. 16. Emmy Destinn. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Nov. 25. Mary Garden. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Jan. 22. Carl Joern. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Oct. 25. Tilly Koenen. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Nov. 8. Eric Schmedes. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Nov. 10. John McCormack. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Nov. 16. Alma Gluck. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Nov. 16. Edmond Clement. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Nov. 17. Otto Slezak. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Dec. 14. Jeanne Maubourg. New York, N. Y.
  1910. Jan. 5. Liza Lehmann. Boston, Mass.
  1911. Nov. 4. Margarete Matzenauer. New York, N. Y.
  1912. Jan. 9. Elena Gerhardt. New York, N. Y.
  1912. Jan. 11. Vanni Marcoux. Boston, Mass.
  1912. Feb. 14. Lucille Marcel. Boston, Mass.
  1912. Nov. 4. Titta Ruffo. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1912. Dec. 27. Frieda Hempel. New York, N. Y.
  1913. Nov. 28. Sophie Braslau. New York, N. Y.
  1916. Nov. 18. Amelita Galli-Curci. Chicago, Ill.
  1917. Nov. 19. Anna Fitziu. Chicago, Ill.
  1917. Nov. 29. May Peterson. New York, N. Y.
  1917. Dec. 1. Genevieve Vix. Chicago, Ill.
  1918. Jan. 31. Hipolito Lazaro. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Nov. 11. B. Cousinou. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Nov. 13. G. Crimi. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Nov. 13. Montesanto. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Nov. 15. Rosa Ponselle. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Dec. 7. A. Dolci. Chicago, Ill.
  1919. Jan. 31. Charles Hackett. New York, N. Y.
  1919. Dec. 10. Madame Besanzoni. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Jan. 9. Selma Kurtz. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Nov. 14. B. Gigli. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Nov. 15. Tino Pattiera. Chicago, Ill.
  1921. Nov. 16. Edith Mason. Chicago, Ill.
  1921. Nov. 19. Marie Jeritza. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Nov. 29. Claire Dux. Chicago, Ill.


DEBUTS, Violinists
  1843. Nov. 25. Ole Bull. New York, N. Y.
  1844. Dec. 15. Henri Vieuxtemps. New York, N. Y.
  1844. Alexandre Artot. New York, N. Y.
  1846. Oct. 12. Camille Sivori. New York, N. Y.
  1848. Edouard Remenyi. New York, N. Y.
  1850. Miska Hauser. New York, N. Y.
  1850. Pablo Sarasate. New York, N. Y.
  1852. Oct. 29. Camilla Urso. New York, N. Y.
  1872. Sept. 23. Henri Wieniawski. New York, N. Y.
  1872. Emil Sauret, New York, N. Y.
  1878. Sept. 26. August Wilhelmj. New York, N. Y.
  1883. Nov. 16. Ovide Musin. New York, N. Y.
  1885. Dec. 3. Maud Powell. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1887. Teresina Tua. New York, N. Y.
  1888. Nov. 10. Fritz Kreisler. New York, N. Y.
  1893. Henri Marteau. New York, N. Y.
  1894. Oct. 30. Cesar Thomson. New York, N. Y.
  1894. Nov. 25. Eugene Ysaye. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Willy Burmester. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Nov. 15. Franz Ondricek. New York, N. Y.
  1896. Nov. 8. Carl Halir. New York, N. Y.
  1896. Nov. 24. C. Gregorovitch. New York, N. Y.
  1896. Martin Marsick. New York, N. Y.
  1898. Dec. 28. Maud MacCarthy. New York, N. Y.
  1899. Feb. 8. Madame Norman Neruda (Lady Halle). Boston, Mass.
  1899. Nov. 17. A. Petchnikof. New York, N. Y.
  1901. Dec. 2. Jan Kubelik. New York, N. Y.
  1902. Nov. 19. J. Kocian. New York, N. Y.
  1903. Feb. 5. Hugo Heermann. New York, N. Y.
  1903. Oct. 30. Jacques Thibaud. New York, N. Y.
  1905. Dec. 1. Kathleen Parlow. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Nov. 7. Albert Spaulding. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Dec. 10. Mischa Elman. New York, N. Y.
  1910. Oct. 29. Anton Witek. Boston, Mass.
  1911. Oct. 27. Efrem Zimbalist. Boston, Mass.
  1917. Oct. 27. Jascha Heifetz. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Jan. 12. Max Rosen. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Feb. 25. Mayer Wadler. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Nov. 3. Thelma Given. New York, N. Y.
  1918. Nov. 13. Raoul Vidas. New York, N. Y.
  1919. Jan. 28. Leopold Auer. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Mar. 3. S. Culbertson. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Oct. 3. Michel Piastro. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Oct. 16. Josef Stopak. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Oct. 25. Michel Gusikov. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Nov. 2. D. Karekjarto. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Nov. 22. Vasa Prihoda. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Nov. 29. Daisy Kennedy. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Jan. 14. Alexander Schmuller. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Jan. 17. Izzy Mitnisky. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Feb. 2. Erika Morini. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Feb. 14. Paul Kockanski. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Feb. 22. Carlo Sabatini. New York, N. Y.


VIOLONCELLISTS
  1902. Nov. 19. Elsa Ruegger. New York, N. Y.
  1904. Jan. 12. Pablo Casals. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Dec. 5. J. Malkin. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Jan. 19. Daisy Jean. New York, N. Y.


FESTIVALS
  1847. Mendelssohn Festival. New York, N. Y.
  1857. Musical Festivals. Worcester, Mass.
  1864. Band Festival. New Orleans, La.
  1869. First Peace Jubilee. Boston, Mass.
  1873. May Festivals. Cincinnati, O.
  1876. Centennial Exposition. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1877. Wagner Festival. Boston, Mass.
  1884. Wagner Festival. New York, N. Y.
  1886. Litchfield County Festivals. Norfolk, Conn.
  1900. Bach Festivals. Bethlehem, Pa.
  1907. Beethoven Festival. New York, N. Y.
  1910. MacDowell Festivals. Peterboro, N. H.
  1911. Brahms Festivals. New York, N. Y.
  1921. Pilgrim Pageant. Plymouth, Mass.


INSTRUMENTS
  1700. Pipe Organ. Fort Royal, Va.
  1713. Brattle Organ. Boston, Mass.
  1716. Flageolets, Oboes, etc. Boston, Mass.
  1728. Organ, Christ Church. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1733. Organ, Trinity Church. Newport, R. I.
  1737. Organ, Trinity Church. New York, N. Y.
  1743. Organ Moravian Church. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1743. Violins, Horns, etc. Bethlehem, Pa.
  1745. Bromfield Organ. Boston, Mass.
  1756. Organ, City Hall. New York, N. Y.
  1756. Organ, King's Chapel. Boston, Mass.
  1769. Spinet (J. Harris). Boston, Mass.
  1770. Organ, Congregational Church. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1774. Pianoforte. John Behrent. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1787. Pipe Organ, J. Downer. Cookstown, Pa.
  1803. Pianoforte, Benj. Crehore. Milton, Mass.
  1823. Pianoforte, J. Chickering. Boston, Mass.
  1837. Pianoforte, Wm. Knabe. Baltimore, Md.
  1853. Pianoforte, Steinway & Sons. New York, N. Y.
  1863. Organ, Music Hall. Boston, Mass.
  1878. Organ, Music Hall. Cincinnati, O.
  1914. Organ, Pan American Exposition. San Francisco, Cal.


MUSICIANS
  1735-1794. James Lyons.
  1737-1791. Francis Hopkinson.
  1746-1800. William Billings.
  1792-1872. Lowell Mason.
  1813-1893. John S. Dwight.
  1820-1895. George F. Root.
  1826-1864. Stephen Foster.
  1829-1869. Louis N. Gottschalk.
  1829-1908. William Mason.
  1834-1891. Eben Tourjee.
  1835-1905. Theodore Thomas.
  1839-1905. John K. Paine.
  1839-1909. Dudley Buck.
  1854-1910. William Sherwood.
  1861-1908. Edward MacDowell.
  1862-1901. Ethelbert Nevin.


NATIONAL HYMNS
  1798. April 25. "Hail Columbia." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1814. Sept. 14. "The Star-Spangled Banner." Baltimore, Md.
  1832. July 4. "America." Boston, Mass.


OPERA COMPANIES (Managers, etc.)
  1790. French Company. New Orleans, La.
  1793. French Company. Charleston, S. C.
  1825. Garcia's Company. New York, N. Y.
  1827. French Company. New York, N. Y.
  1832. L. da Ponte's Company. New York, N. Y.
  1838. Seguin's Company. New York, N. Y.
  1847. Havana Company. New York, N. Y.
  1848. Maretzek's Company. New York, N. Y.
  1849. Artists' Union Company. New York, N. Y.
  1850. First opera in Chicago, Ill.
  1853. First opera in San Francisco, Cal.
  1855. German Company (J. Ungher's Co.). New York, N. Y.
  1857. Strakosch. New York, N. Y.
  1867. Opera Bouffe. New York, N. Y.
  1869. Russian Opera. New York, N. Y.
  1878. Mapleson's Company. New York, N. Y.
  1883. Henry E. Abbey's Company. New York, N. Y.
  1890. Abbey and Schoeffel. New York, N. Y.
  1893. Abbey and Grau. New York, N. Y.
  1895. Damrosch's German Company. New York, N. Y.
  1897. Damrosch-Ellis Company. New York, N. Y.
  1902. H. Conried. New York, N. Y.
  1906. Hammerstein. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Gatti-Casazza. New York, N. Y.
  1909. Boston Opera Company. Boston, Mass.
  1910. Philadelphia-Chicago Company. Chicago, Ill.


OPERA HOUSES, ETC.
  1722. First Theatre in America. Williamsburg, Pa.
  1753. Nassau St. Theatre. New York, N. Y.
  1798. Park Theatre. New York, N. Y.
  1807. Le Theatre St. Philippe. New Orleans, La.
  1813. Theatre d'Orleans. New Orleans, La.
  1818. Theatre d'Orleans rebuilt. New Orleans, La.
  1833. First Opera House. New York, N. Y.
  1847. Palmo's Opera House. New York, N. Y.
  1847. Astor Place Opera House. New York, N. Y.
  1852. Music Hall. Boston, Mass.
  1854. Academy of Music. New York, N. Y.
  1856. Academy of Music. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1859. New French Opera House. New Orleans, La.
  1865. Crosby Opera House. Chicago, Ill.
  1877. Tivoli Opera House. San Francisco, Cal.
  1879. Central Music Hall. Chicago, Ill.
  1883. Metropolitan Opera House. New York, N. Y.
  1889. Auditorium. Chicago, Ill.
  1893. New Metropolitan Opera House. New York, N. Y.
  1904. Orchestral Hall. Chicago, Ill.
  1906. Manhattan Opera House. New York, N. Y.
  1908. Academy of Music. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1908. Hammerstein Opera House. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1909. Opera House. Boston, Mass.
  1911. Aeolian Hall. New York, N. Y.


PUBLICATIONS, EARLY
  1640. The Bay Psalm Book. Cambridge, Mass.
  1712. Instruction book. Newbury, Mass.
  1759. "My days have been so wondrous free." Phila., Pa.
  1761. "Urania." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1770. "The New England Psalm Singer." Boston, Mass.
  1788. "Seven Songs." Philadelphia, Pa.
  1792. "American Harmony." Charlestown, Mass.
  1793. "Rural Harmony." Topsfield, Mass.
  1793. "The Union Harmony." Charlestown, Mass.
  1852. Dwight's Journal of Music. Boston, Mass.


PUBLIC SCHOOL MUSIC
  1838. Lowell Mason. Boston, Mass.


PUBLISHER (MUSIC)
  1835. Oliver Ditson. Boston, Mass.


SOCIETIES (Choral and Orchestral)
  1720. New England (Sundry).
  1742. Singstunde. Bethlehem, Pa.
  1759. Orpheus Club. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1762. St. Cecilia Society. Charleston, S. C.
  1780. Handel Society of Dartmouth College. Hanover, N. H.
  1784. Harmonic Society. Fredericksburg, Va.
  1786. Stoughton Musical Society. Stoughton, Mass.
  1786. Mr. Hulett's Singing Society. New York, N. Y.
  1787. Uranian Society, Philadelphia, Pa.
  1788. Musical Society of New York. New York, N. Y.
  1791. Cecilia Society. New York, N. Y.
  1793. Uranian Society. New York, N. Y.
  1793. St. Cecilia Society. Newport, R. I.
  1797. Musical Society. Concord, N. H.
  1799. Musical Society. Baltimore, Md.
  1799. Euterpean Society. New York, N. Y.
  1800. Philharmonic Society. New York, N. Y.
  1802. Harmonic Society. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1807. Mass. Musical Society. Boston, Mass.
  1808. Pierian Sodality. Cambridge, Mass.
  1809. Haydn Society. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1815. Handel and Haydn Society. Boston, Mass.
  1819. Haydn Society. Cincinnati, O.
  1820. Philharmonic Society. Bethlehem, Pa.
  1820. Philharmonic Society. New York, N. Y.
  1820. Euterpean Society. New York, N. Y.
  1820. Musical Fund Society. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1821. Beethoven Society. Portland, Me.
  1821. Psallion Society. Providence, R. I.
  1821. New Hampshire Musical Society. Hanover, N. H.
  1823. Sacred Music Society. New York, N. Y.
  1824. St. Cecilia Society. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1829. Central Musical Society. Concord, N. H.
  1834. Old Settlers Harmonic Society. Chicago, Ill.
  1835. German Maennerchor. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1837. Harvard Musical Association. Boston, Mass.
  1837. Academy of Music Orchestra. Boston, Mass.
  1838. Philharmonic Society. St. Louis, Mo.
  1839. Musical Convention. Montpelier, Vt.
  1842. Philharmonic Society. New York, N. Y.
  1842. Sacred Music Society. Chicago, Ill.
  1843. Philharmonic Concerts. Boston, Mass.
  1844. Musical Institute. New York, N. Y.
  1846. Steyermark's Orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1847. Deutscher Liederkrantz. New York, N. Y.
  1847. Mozart Society. Chicago, Ill.
  1847. Musical Fund Society. Boston, Mass.
  1848. Germania Orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1848. Gungl's Orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1848. Lombardy Orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1848. Musical Convention. Chicago, Ill.
  1849. Sacred Harmonic Society. New York, N. Y.
  1849. Musikverein. Milwaukee, Wis.
  1850. Worcester Festival Association. Worcester, Mass.
  1850. Philharmonic Orchestra. Chicago, Ill.
  1852. Maennergesang Verein. Chicago, Ill.
  1853. Julien's Orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1855. Philharmonic Society. Boston, Mass.
  1856. Cecilia Society. Cincinnati, O.
  1856. Harmonic Society. Cincinnati, O.
  1857. Musical Union. Chicago, Ill.
  1857. Brooklyn Orchestra. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1858. Mendelssohn Quintet. Boston, Mass.
  1859. Gilmore's Band. Boston, Mass.
  1860. Philharmonic Society. Chicago, Ill.
  1860. Oratorio Society. San Francisco, Cal.
  1863. Mendelssohn Society. New York, N. Y.
  1864. Th. Thomas Orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1865. German Maennerchor. Chicago, Ill.
  1868. Salem Oratorio Society. Salem, Mass.
  1869. Oratorio Society. Chicago, Ill.
  1869. Church Music Association. New York, N. Y.
  1870. Russian Male Choir. Boston, Mass.
  1871. Apollo Club. Boston, Mass.
  1872. Apollo Musical Club. Chicago, Ill.
  1873. Germania Orchestra. Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1874. Cecilia Society. Boston, Mass.
  1875. Cecilia Club. Philadelphia, Pa.
  1876. Loring Club. San Francisco, Cal.
  1876. Music Teachers' National Association. Delaware, O.
  1878. Symphony Society. New York, N. Y.
  1879. Philharmonic Society. Boston, Mass.
  1881. Manhattan Choral Union. New York, N. Y.
  1881. N. Y. Choral Society. New York, N. Y.
  1881. Boston Symphony Orchestra. Boston, Mass.
  1885. Kneisel Quartet. Boston, Mass.
  1886. Norfolk Co. Festival Association. Litchfield, Conn.
  1886. Chicago Symphony Society. Chicago, Ill.
  1889. Brooklyn Symphony Orchestra. Brooklyn, N. Y.
  1892. Peoples' Choral Union. New York, N. Y.
  1892. Sousa's Band. Tours.
  1893. Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra. Pittsburgh, Pa.
  1895. Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra. Cincinnati, O.
  1895. San Francisco Symphony Orchestra, San Francisco, Cal.
  1896. Los Angeles Symphony Orchestra. Los Angeles, Cal.
  1899. Society of American Musicians and Composers. New York, N. Y.
  1900. Vienna Orchestra. Tour.
  1901. Leipzig Philharmonic Orchestra. Tour.
  1901. Century Club. Atlanta, Ga.
  1902. Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra. Minneapolis, Minn.
  1903. Symphony Society reorganized. New York, N. Y.
  1903. Russian Symphony Orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1904. Volpe's Orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1905. St. Paul Symphony Orchestra. St. Paul, Minn.
  1906. Musical Art Society. Chicago, Ill.
  1906. "La Scala" Orchestra of Milan. Tour.
  1906. Philharmonic Society. New Orleans, La.
  1907. Mendelssohn Choir (Toronto). Tour.
  1912. London Symphony Orchestra. Tour.
  1911. Kansas City Symphony Orchestra. Kansas City, Mo.
  1912. London Symphony Orchestra. Tour.
  1914. Detroit Symphony Orchestra. Detroit, Mich.
  1914. Fort Worth Symphony Orchestra. Fort Worth, Texas.
  1914. American Symphony Orchestra. Chicago, Ill.
  1915. Baltimore Symphony Orchestra. Baltimore, Md.
  1917. New Orleans Symphony Orchestra. New Orleans, La.
  1919. Musicians' New Symphony Orchestra. New York, N. Y.
  1920. Civic Music Students' Orchestra. Chicago, Ill.
  1920. Toscanini's "La Scala" Orchestra. Tour.


    +----------------------------------------------------+
    |                Transcriber's Note:                 |
    |                                                    |
    | Typographical errors corrected in the text:        |
    |                                                    |
    | Page  13  Pellisier changed to Pellesier           |
    | Page  25  Nov 18. Verdi's should read Rossini's    |
    | Page  26  Salvione's changed to Salvioni's         |
    | Page  26  Venderi changed to Vendere               |
    | Page  30  Rosenburgh changed to Rosenberg          |
    | Page  40  apppeared changed to appeared            |
    | Page  48  Seidenburg changed to Seidenberg         |
    | Page  48  Ncw changed to New                       |
    | Paqe  50  Hinckley changed to Hinkley              |
    | Page  51  duo changed to due                       |
    | Page  53  Berlioz' changed to Berlioz's            |
    | Page  53  Zuecchi changed to Zucchi                |
    | Page  54  Nachtlicher changed to Nachtliche        |
    | Page  62  Abou changed to Abu                      |
    | Page  62  Saint-Saen's changed to Saint-Saens's    |
    | Page  63  Reineke's changed to Reinecke's          |
    | Page  72  50c changed to 50c                       |
    | Page  79  Mauric changed to Maurice                |
    | Page  85  Burch's changed to Bruch's               |
    | Page  96  appared changed to appeared              |
    | Page 103  Strausss's changed to Strauss's          |
    | Page 103  umschlugen changed to umschlungen        |
    | Page 104  Chauvee changed to Chauve                |
    | Page 109  Cephisse changed to Cephise              |
    | Page 109  Reisenaur changed to Reisenauer          |
    | Page 118  Chaliapine changed to Chaliapin          |
    | Page 118  Heerman changed to Heermann              |
    | Page 127  Chansson changed to Chanson              |
    | Page 134  Razine changed to Razin                  |
    | Page 138  Glier's changed to Gliere's              |
    | Page 138  saxaphone changed to saxophone           |
    | Page 139  Decoudray's changed to Ducoudray's       |
    | Page 141  enr'acte changed to entr'acte            |
    | Page 146  Wuelllner changed to Wuellner              |
    | Page 153  Lekue's changed to Lekew's               |
    | Page 160  Holbrook's changed to Holbrooke's        |
    | Page 169  Bornscheim's changed to Bornschein's     |
    | Page 171  producted changed to produced            |
    | Page 174  Reschigliani changed to Reschiglian      |
    | Page 179  pantomine changed to pantomime           |
    | Page 182  Hasselsmans changed to Hasselmans        |
    | Page 189  Beniami changed to Beniamino             |
    | Page 190  Assocation changed to Association        |
    | Page 191  363 changed to 263                       |
    | Page 191  286 changed to 259                       |
    | Page 192  104 changed to 102                       |
    | Page 196  Removed entry for Bassi; moved to Bossi  |
    | Page 198  Nadajen changed to Najaden               |
    | Page 202  Cambogienne changed to Cambodgienne      |
    | Page 208  Caisse changed to Casse                  |
    | Page 209  d'Armour changed to d'Amour              |
    | Page 212  Le changed to La                         |
    | Page 228  Jacquarita changed to Jaquarita          |
    | Page 229  Nordishe changed to Nordische            |
    | Page 247  Added entry for Noskowski, S.; removed   |
    |           from Moszkowski                          |
    | Page 250  PIZETTI changed to PIZZETTI              |
    | Page 251  Schecchi changed to Schicchi             |
    | Page 253  Romaneska changed to Romanesca           |
    | Page 253  Tagenzeiten changed to Tageszeiten       |
    | Page 260  Fruehlingswagen changed to Fruehlingswogen |
    | Page 264  Ecstacy changed to Ecstasy               |
    | Page 266  La changed to Le                         |
    | Page 266  Chiozzote changed to Chiozzotte          |
    | Page 273  comedia changed to commedia              |
    | Page 275  Vascella changed to Vascello             |
    | Page 284  Feruccio changed to Ferruccio            |
    | Page 284  Reisenaur changed to Reisenauer          |
    | Page 285  Clothilde changed to Clotilde            |
    | Page 286  Nw changed to New                        |
    | Page 287  Hanfstaengel changed to Hanfstaengl      |
    | Page 291  Heerman changed to Heermann              |
    +----------------------------------------------------+





End of Project Gutenberg's Annals of Music in America, by Henry Charles Lahee