Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Josephine Paolucci, Janet
Blenkinship and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries.)









SHAKESPEARE'S FAMILY

[Illustration]

[Illustration: William Shakespeare from the Drocshout painting now in
the Shakespeare Memorial Gallery at Stratford-on-Avon.]




SHAKESPEARE'S FAMILY


BEING


A Record of the Ancestors and Descendants
of William Shakespeare


WITH

_SOME ACCOUNT OF THE ARDENS_


BY

MRS. C. C. STOPES

AUTHOR OF
"THE BACON-SHAKESPEARE QUESTION ANSWERED," "SHAKESPEARE'S WARWICKSHIRE
CONTEMPORARIES," "BRITISH FREEWOMEN," ETC.


LONDON
ELLIOT STOCK, 62, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.
NEW YORK
JAMES POTT & COMPANY
1901


Transcriber's note: Minor typos have been corrected. Footnotes have been
moved to the end of the chapter. Letters that are preceeded by a caret
(^) are superscripted in the text.




PREFACE


When I was invited to reprint in book-form the articles which had
appeared in the _Genealogical Magazine_ under the titles of
"Shakespeare's Family" and the "Warwickshire Ardens," I carefully
corrected them, and expanded them where expansion could be made
interesting. Thus to the bald entries of Shakespeare's birth and burial
I added a short life. Perhaps never before has anyone attempted to write
a life of the poet with so little allusion to his plays and poems. My
reason is clear; it is only the genealogical details of certain
Warwickshire families of which I now treat, and it is only as an
interesting Warwickshire gentleman that the poet is here included.

Much of the chaotic nonsense that has of late years been written to
disparage his character and contest his claims to our reverence and
respect are based on the assumption that he was a man of low origin and
of mean occupation. I deny any relevance to arguments based on such an
assumption, for genius is restricted to no class, and we have a Burns as
well as a Chaucer, a Keats as well as a Gower, yet I am glad that the
result of my studies tends to prove that it is but an unfounded
assumption. By the Spear-side his family was at least respectable, and
by the Spindle-side his pedigree can be traced straight back to Guy of
Warwick and the good King Alfred. There is something in fallen fortune
that lends a subtler romance to the consciousness of a noble ancestry,
and we may be sure this played no small part in the making of the poet.

All that bear his name gain a certain interest through him, and
therefore I have collected every notice I can find of the Shakespeares,
though we are all aware none can be his descendants, and that the family
of his sister can alone now enter into the poet's pedigree with any
degree of certainty.

The time for romancing has gone by, and nothing more can be done
concerning the poet's life except through careful study and through
patient research. All students must regret that their labours have such
comparatively meagre results. Though sharing in this regret, I have been
able, besides adding minor details, to find at last a definite link of
association between the Park Hall and the Wilmcote Ardens; and I have
located a John Shakespeare in St. Clement's Danes, Strand, London, who
is probably the poet's cousin. I have also somewhat cleared the ground
by checking errors, such as those made by Halliwell-Phillipps,
concerning John Shakespeare, of Ingon, and Gilbert Shakespeare,
Haberdasher, of London (see page 226). I hope that every contribution to
our store of real knowledge may bring forward new suggestions and
additional facts.

In regard to his mother's family, I thought it important to clear the
earlier connections. But it must not be forgotten that until modern
times no Shakespeare but himself was connected with the Ardens. Yet,
having commenced with the family, I may be pardoned for adding to their
history before the sixteenth century the few notes I have gleaned
concerning the later branches.

The order I have preferred has been chronological, limited by the
advisability of completing the notices of a family in special
localities.

Disputed questions I have placed in chapters apart, as they would bulk
too largely in a short biography to be proportionate. Hence the Coat of
Arms and the Arden Connections are treated as family matters, apart from
John Shakespeare's special biography. I have done what I could to avoid
mistakes, and neither time nor trouble has been spared. I owe thanks to
many who have helped me in my long-continued and careful researches, to
the officials of the British Museum and the Public Record Office, to the
Town Council of Stratford-on-Avon and Mr. Savage, Secretary of the
Shakespeare Trust, to the Worshipful Company of the Haberdashers, for
allowing me to study their records; to the late Earl of Warwick, for
admission to his Shakespeare Library, and to many clergymen who have
permitted me to search their registers.

                    CHARLOTTE CARMICHAEL STOPES.




CONTENTS

                       PART I

CHAPTER                                                 PAGE

   I. THE NAME OF SHAKESPEARE                              1

  II. THE LOCALITIES OF EARLY SHAKESPEARES                 4

 III. LATER SHAKESPEARES BEFORE THE POET'S TIME           10

  IV. THE SHAKESPEARE COAT OF ARMS                        17

   V. THE IMPALEMENT OF THE ARDEN ARMS                    24

  VI. THE ARDENS OF WILMECOTE                             35

 VII. JOHN SHAKESPEARE                                    50

VIII. WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE                                 61

  IX. SHAKESPEARE'S DESCENDANTS                           87

   X. COLLATERALS                                        110

  XI. COUSINS AND CONNECTIONS                            113

 XII. CONTEMPORARY WARWICKSHIRE SHAKESPEARES             118

XIII. SHAKESPEARES IN OTHER COUNTIES                     132

 XIV. LONDON SHAKESPEARES                                142


                     PART II

   I. THE PARK HALL ARDENS                               162

  II. THE ARDENS OF LONGCROFT                            183

 III. OTHER WARWICKSHIRE ARDENS                          188

  IV. THE ARDENS OF CHESHIRE                             196

   V. BRANCHES IN OTHER COUNTIES                         213

      TERMINAL NOTES                                     222

      INDEX                                              239




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                        PAGE
PORTRAIT OF WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE               _Frontispiece_

SHAKESPEARE'S ARMS                                        17

OLD HOUSE AT WILMECOTE, BY SOME SUPPOSED TO BE
    ROBERT ARDEN'S                             _To face_  35

PRESENT VIEW OF SHAKESPEARE'S BIRTHPLACE             "    55

THE GUILD CHAPEL, FROM THE SITE OF NEW PLACE         "    67

THE CHANCEL, TRINITY CHURCH                          "    83

SHAKESPEARE'S EPITAPH                                     84

ANNE HATHAWAY'S COTTAGE                        _To face_  88

ANNE SHAKESPEARE'S EPITAPH                                90

SNITTERFIELD CHURCH                            _To face_ 113

NORDEN'S MAP OF LONDON, 1593                         "   142

WARWICK CASTLE                                       "   162

SWAN THEATRE (BY DR. GAIDERTY)                       "   214

THE BEAR GARDEN AND HOPE THEATRE                     "   216

SWAN THEATRE                                         "   216


    When, from the midst of a people, there riseth a man
    Who voices the life of its life, the dreams of its soul,
    The Nation's Ideal takes shape, on Nature's old plan,
    Expressing, informing, impelling, the fashioning force of the whole.

    The Spirit of England, thus Shakespeare our Poet arose;
    For England made Shakespeare, as Shakespeare makes England anew.
    His people's ideals should clearly their kinship disclose,
    To England, themselves, the more true, in that they to their
        Shakespeare are true.




Shakespeare's Family




_PART I_

CHAPTER I

THE NAME OF SHAKESPEARE


The origin of the name of "Shakespeare" is hidden in the mists of
antiquity. Writers in _Notes and Queries_ have formed it from Sigisbert,
or from Jacques Pierre,[1] or from "Haste-vibrans." Whatever it was at
its initiation, it may safely be held to have been an intentionally
significant appellation in later years. That it referred to feats of
arms may be argued from analogy. Italian heraldry[2] illustrates a name
with an exactly similar meaning and use in the Italian language, that of
Crollalanza.

English authors use it as an example of their theories. Verstegan
says[3]: "Breakspear, Shakespeare, and the like, have bin surnames
imposed upon the first bearers of them for valour and feates of armes;"
and Camden[4] also notes: "Some are named from that they carried, as
Palmer ... Long-sword, Broadspear, and in some respects Shakespear."

In "The Polydoron"[5] it is stated that "Names were first questionlesse
given for distinction, facultie, consanguinity, desert, quality ... as
Armestrong, Shakespeare, of high quality."

That it was so understood by his contemporaries we may learn from
Spenser's allusion, evidently intended for him, seeing no other poet of
his time had an "heroic name"[6]:

    "And there, though last, not least is Aetion;
    A gentler shepherd[7] may nowhere be found,
    Whose Muse, full of high thought's invention,
    Doth like himself heroically sound."

If the parts of the name be significant, I take it that the correct
spelling at any period is that of the contemporary spelling of the
parts. Therefore, when spear was spelt "spere," the cognomen should be
spelt "Shakespere"; when spear was spelt "speare," as it was in the
sixteenth century, the name should be spelt "Shakespeare." Other methods
of spelling depended upon the taste or education of the writers, during
transition periods, when they seemed actually to _prefer_ varieties, as
one sometimes finds a proper name spelt in three different ways by the
same writer on the same page. "Shakespeare" was the contemporary form of
the name that the author himself passed in correcting the proofs of the
"first heirs of his invention" in 1593 and 1594; and "Shakespeare" was
the Court spelling of the period, as may be seen by the first official
record of the name. When Mary, Countess of Southampton, made out the
accounts of the Treasurer of the Chamber after the death of her second
husband, Sir Thomas Heneage, in 1594, she wrote: "To William Kempe,
William Shakespeare,[8] and Richard Burbage," etc.

I know that Dr. Furnivall[9] wrote anathemas against those who dared to
spell the name thus, while the poet wrote it otherwise. But a man's
spelling of his own name counted very little then. He might have held
romantically to the quainter spelling of the olden time as many others
did, such as "Duddeley," "Crumwell," "Elmer."

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Notes and Queries_, 2nd Series, ix. 459, x. 15, 86, 122; 7th
Series, iv. 66; 8th Series, vii. 295; 5th Series, ii. 2.

[2] See Works of Goffredo di Crollalanza, Segretario-Archivista dell'
Accademia Araldica Italiana, which were brought to my notice by Dr.
Richard Garnett.

[3] Verstegan's "Restitution of Decayed Intelligence," ed. 1605, p. 254.

[4] Camden's "Remains," ed. 1605, p. 111.

[5] Undated, but contemporary. _Notes and Queries_, 3rd Series, i. 266.

[6] Spenser's "Colin Clout's Come Home Again," 1595.

[7] It was a fashion of the day to call all poets "shepherds."

[8] "Declared Accounts of the Treasurer of the Chamber," Pipe Office,
542 (1594). See my English article, "The Earliest Official Record of
Shakespeare's Name."--"Shakespeare Jahrbuch," Berlin, 1896, reprinted in
pamphlet form.

[9] "On Shakespere's Signatures," by Dr. F.J. Furnivall, in the _Journal
of the Society of Archivists and Autograph Collectors_, No. I., June,
1895.




CHAPTER II

THE LOCALITIES OF EARLY SHAKESPEARES


We find the name occurs in widely scattered localities from very early
times. Perhaps a resembling name ought to be noted "in the hamlet of
Pruslbury, Gloucestershire,[10] where there were four tenants. This was
at one time an escheat of the King, who gave it to his valet, Simon
_Shakespeye_, who afterwards gave it to Constantia de Legh, who gave it
to William Solar, the defendant." If this represents a 1260
"Shakespere," as there is every reason to believe it does, this is the
earliest record of the name yet found. This belief is strengthened by
the discovery that a _Simon Sakesper_ was in the service of the Crown in
1278, as herderer of the Forest of Essex,[11] in the Hundred of
Wauthorn, 7 Edward I. Between these two dates Mr. J. W. Rylands[12] has
found a Geoffrey Shakespeare on the jury in the Hundred of Brixton, co.
Surrey, in 1268.[13]

The next[14] I have noted occurs in Kent in the thirteenth century,
where a John Shakespeare appears in a judicial case, 1278-79, at
Freyndon.

The fifth notice is in the north.[15] The Hospital of St. Nicholas,
Carlisle, had from its foundation been endowed with a thrave of corn
from every ploughland in Cumberland. These were withheld by the
landowners in the reign of Edward III., for some reason, and an inquiry
was instituted in 1357. The jury decided that the corn was due. It had
been withheld for eight years by various persons, among whom was "Henry
Shakespere, of the Parish of Kirkland," east of Penrith. This gives,
therefore, really an entry of this Shakespere's existence at that place
as early as 1349, and an examination of Court Records may prove an
earlier settlement of the family.

There was a transfer of lands in Penrith described as "next the land of
Allan Shakespeare," and amongst the witnesses was William
Shakespeare,[16] April, 21 Richard II., 1398.

In the "Records of the Borough of Nottingham,"[17] we find a John
Shakespere plaintiff against Richard de Cotgrave, spicer, for deceit in
sale of dye-wood on November 8, 31 Edward III. (1357); Richard, the
servant of Robert le Spondon, plaintiff against John Shakespere for
assault. John proves himself in the right, and receives damages, October
21, 1360.

The first appearance yet found of the name in Warwickshire is in 1359,
when Thomas Sheppey and Henry Dilcock, Bailiffs of Coventry, account for
the property of Thomas Shakespere,[18] felon, who had left his goods and
fled.

Halliwell-Phillipps[19] notes as his earliest entry of the name a Thomas
Shakespere, of Youghal, 49 Edward III. (1375). A writer in _Notes and
Queries_[20] gives a date two years later when "Thomas Shakespere and
Richard Portingale" were appointed Comptrollers of the Customs in
Youghal, 51 Edward III. (1377). This would imply that he was a highly
trustworthy man. Yet, by some turn of fortune's wheel, he may have been
the same man as the felon.

In Controlment Rolls, 2 Richard II. (June, 1377, to June, 1379), there
is an entry of "Walter Shakespere, formerly in gaol in Colchester
Castle."[21] John Shakespeare was imprisoned in Colchester gaol as a
perturbator of the King's peace, March 3rd, 4 Richard II., 1381.[22] At
Pontefract, Robert Schaksper, Couper, and Emma his wife are mentioned as
paying poll-tax, 2 Rich. II.[23]

The Rev. Mr. Norris,[24] working from original documents, notes that on
November 24 (13 Richard II.), 1389, Adam Shakespere, who is described as
son and heir of Adam of Oldediche, held lands within the manor of
Baddesley Clinton by military service, and probably had only just then
obtained them. Oldediche, or Woldich, now commonly called Old Ditch
Lane, lies within the parish of Temple Balsall, not far from the manor
of Baddesley.

This closes the notices of the family that I have collected during the
fourteenth century. The above-noted Adam Shakespere, the younger, died
in 1414, leaving a widow, Alice, and a son and heir, John, then under
age, who held lands until 20 Henry VI., 1441. It is not clear who
succeeded him, but probably two brothers, Ralph and Richard, who held
lands in Baddesley, called Great Chedwyns, adjoining Wroxall. Mr. Norris
says that no further mention of the name appears in Baddesley, but one
notice of the property is given later. Ralph and Joanna, his wife, had
two daughters--Elizabeth, married to Robert Huddespit, and Isolda,
married to Robert Kakley. Elizabeth Huddespit, a widow, in 1506 held the
lands which Adam Shakespeare held in 1389.

The family of Shakespeare appears in the "Register of the Guild of
Knowle,"[1] a semi-religious society to which the best in the county
belonged:

    1457. Pro anima Ricardi Shakespere et Alicia uxor
    ejus de Woldiche.[25]

    1464. Johanna Shakespere.
          Radulphus Shakespere et Isabella uxor ejus et
            pro anima Johannae uxoris primae.
          Ricardus Schakespeire de Wroxhale et Margeria
            uxor ejus.

    1476. Thomas Chacsper et Christian cons. sue de
            Rowneton.
          Johannis Shakespeyre de Rowington et Alicia
            uxor ejus.

    1486. 1 Hen. VII. Thomae Schakspere, p aiaei.
          Thomas Shakspere et Alicia uxor ejus de
            Balsale.

Mr. Yeatman has studied the Court Rolls of this period. It is to be
wished he had published his book in two volumes, one of facts and one of
opinions. He says that the earliest record of the Court Rolls of
Wroxall[26] is one dated 5 Henry V. (1418). It is a grant by one
Elizabeth Shakspere to John Lone and William Prins of a messuage with
three crofts. (The same Rolls tell us that in 22 Henry VIII. Alice Love
surrendered to William Shakespeare and Agnes his wife a property
apparently the same.)

In 1485 John Hill, John Shakespeare and others, were enfeoffed in land
called "Harveys" in Rowington, and John appears as witness in 1492 and
1496.[27]

There were Shakesperes at Coventry and Meriden in the fifteenth century.
John Dwale, merchant of Coventry, left legacies by will to Annes Lane
and to Richard Shakespere, March 15, 1499.[28]

Among the "foreign fines" of the borough of Nottingham,[29] Robert
Shakespeyr paid eightpence for license to buy and sell in the borough in
1414-15. The same Robert complains of John Fawkenor for non-payment of
the price of wood for making arrows. And French[30] tells us there was a
Thomas Shakespere, a man at arms, going to Ireland on August 27, 18
Edward IV., 1479, with Lord Grey against the king's enemies.

John Shakespere, a chapman in Doncaster,[31] paid on each order 12d.
Among the York wills, John Shakespere of Doncaster mentions his wife,
Joan, 1458. In the same year Sir Thomas Chaworth leaves Margery
Shakesper six marks for her marriage.[32]

In 1448, William Shakspere, labourer, and Agnes, his wife, were legatees
under the will of Alice Langham, of Snailswell, Suffolk.[33]

A family also belonged to London. Mr. Gollancz told me of a certain
"William Schakesper" who was "to be buried within the Hospital of St.
John of Jerusalem, in England," in 1413.[34] On reference to the
original, I found there was no allusion to profession, locality or
family. He left to an unnamed father and mother twenty shillings each,
and six shillings and eightpence to the hospital. The residue to William
Byrdsale and John Barbor, to dispose of for the good of his soul; proved
August 3, 1413. There was also a Peter Shakespeare who witnessed the
deed of transfer of the "Hospicium Vocatum le Greyhounde, Shoe Alley,
Bankside, Southwark, February 16, 1483."[35]

FOOTNOTES:

[10] Coram Rege Roll, St. Barthol., 45 Henry III., Memb. 13, No. 117.
_Notes and Queries_, 5th Series, ii. 146.

[11] Fisher's "Forest of Essex," p. 374. _Notes and Queries_, 9th
Series, ii. 167.

[12] Records of Rowington.

[13] Coram Rege Roll, 139, M. 1, 52-53 Hen. III.

[14] Roll of 7 Edward I.: "Placita Corone coram Johanne de Reygate et
sociis suis, justiciariis itinerantibus in Oct. St. Hil. 7 Edward I.,
_apud_ Cantuar." See also _Notes and Queries_, 1st Series, vol. xi., p.
122. Mr. William Henry Hart, F.S.A., contributes a note on the subject
and gives the entry.

[15] _Notes and Queries_, 2nd Series, vol. x., p. 122.

[16] _Notes and Queries_, 6th Series, iv. 126.

[17] "Records of the Borough of Nottingham," by Mr. W. Stevenson.

[18] See Dr. Joseph Hunter's MSS., Addit. MSS., Brit. Mus. 24,484, art.
246.

[19] In Shakespeare's "Life," prefixed to the folio edition.

[20] _Notes and Queries_, J. F. F., 2nd Series, x. 122; see "Rot. Pat.
Claus. Cancellariae Hiberniae Calendarium," vol. i., part i., p. 996.

[21] _Notes and Queries_, 5th Series, i. 25.

[22] Close Rolls, 4 Richard II.; _Notes and Queries_, 7th Series, ii.
318.

[23] _Yorksh. Archaeological Journal_, vol. vi., p. 3. Lay-Subsidies,
206/49, Osgodcrosse, West Riding.

[24] _Notes and Queries_, 8th Series, vol. viii., December 28, 1895;
"Shakespeare's Ancestry," by the Rev. Henry Norris, F.S.A.

[25] Mr. W. B. Bickley's "The Register of the Guild of St. Anne at
Knowle," 1894. Mr. Bickley, in the _Stratford-on-Avon Herald_, November
9, 1895, shows that "Woldiche," "Oldyche" and "Oldwich" are the same,
being a farm in the hamlet of Balsall, in the parish of Hampton in
Arden, and about three miles from Knowle.

[26] Mr. Yeatman's "Gentle Shakespeare," p. 135.

[27] Mr. J. W. Ryland's "Records of Rowington."

[28] Proved May 26, 1500, Somerset House; Moone, f. 2.

[29] Stevenson's "Transcript of Records of the Borough of Nottingham."

[30] French's "Shakespeareana Genealogica," p. 350, and 39/48 "Ancient
Miscellanea Exchequer," Treasury of Receipt, Muster Roll of Men at Arms
going with Lord Grey. At Conway, 18 Edward IV., August 24.

[31] Records of the House of Grayfriars. _Yorksh. Archaeological
Journal_, vol. xii., p. 482.

[32] _Notes and Queries_,6th Series, iv. 158.

[33] "Camden Soc. Publ.," 1851, _Notes and Queries_, 6th Series, vi.
368.

[34] Commissary Court of London Wills, Reg. II., 1413, f. 12.

[35] The deed is preserved at Cordwainers' Hall.




CHAPTER III

LATER SHAKESPEARES BEFORE THE POET'S TIME


In the sixteenth century there were Shakespeares all over the country,
in Essex, Staffordshire, Worcestershire, Nottingham,[36] but chiefly in
Warwick.

There the family had spread rapidly. But it is only the first half of
the century that concerns us at present. There have been Shakespeares
noted in Warwick, Alcester, Berkswell, Snitterfield, Lapworth, Haseley,
Ascote, Rowington, Packwood, Beausal, Temple Grafton, Salford, Tamworth,
Barston, Tachbrook, Haselor, Rugby, Budbrook, Wroxall, Norton-Lindsey,
Wolverton, Hampton-in-Arden, Hampton Lucy, and Knowle.[37]

Most students, recognising Warwickshire as the ancestral home of the
poet's family, exclude the town of Warwick from the field of their
consideration, and select the Shakespeares of Wroxall, partly because
more is known about them, and partly because what is known of them
suggests a higher social status than is granted the other branches. From
the "Guild of Knowle Records" we learn that in 1504 the fraternity was
asked to "pray for the soul of Isabella Shakespeare, formerly Prioress
of Wroxall,"[38] that the name of Alice Shakespere was entered, and
prayers requested for the soul of Thomas Shakespere, of Ballishalle, in
1511; and in the same year Christopher Shakespere and Isabella, his
wife, of Packwood, Meriden, are mentioned. The name of "Domina Jane
Shakspere" appears late in 1526. She is often spoken of as another
Prioress. Now, it is important to notice that Dugdale mentions neither
of these ladies. He records that D. Isabella Asteley was appointed July
30, 1431, and that D. Jocosa Brome, daughter of John Brome,[39]
succeeded her. She resigned in 1524, and died on June 21, 1528.

Agnes Little was confirmed Prioress November 20, 1525, and at the
dissolution of the house a pension of L7 10s. was granted her for life.
The rest of her fellow nuns were exposed to the wide world to seek their
fortunes. Now Dugdale, with all his perfections, occasionally makes
mistakes. He either mistook Asteley for Shakespeare, or another
Shakespeare prioress intervened between the two that he mentions. The
"Guild of Knowle Records" give unimpeachable testimony as to the
existence and date of the Prioress, Isabella Shakespeare. In the edition
of Dugdale's "Warwickshire" by Dr. W. Thomas, 1730, and the edition of
his "Monasticon," published 1823, there is mentioned in a note that a
license for electing to the office was granted Johanna Shakespere,
Sub-Prioress, September 5, 1525. So she might have had the empty title
of Domina, without the usual pension allowed to the Prioress on
dissolution.[40]

After the name of Domina Johanna Shakspere in the Knowle Records occur
those of Richard Shakspere and Alice, his wife; William Shakespere and
Agnes his wife; Johannes Shakespere and Johanna his wife, 1526; Richard
Woodham and Agnes his wife, who was the sister of Richard. This Richard
Shakespere was probably the Bailiff[41] of the Priory, who shortly
before the Dissolution collected the rents and held lands from the
Priory. He, however, was replaced in his office by John Hall, who
received a patent for it on January 4, 26 Henry VIII. Among the tenants
of the dissolved Priory were mentioned[42] "Richard Shakespeare,"
"William Shakespeare," and "land in the tenure of John Shakespeare,
demised to Alice Taylor, of Hanwell, in the county of Oxford."

Mr. Yeatman[43] transcribes a grant of land in Wroxall by the Prioress
Isabella Shakespere to John Shakespere and Elene, his wife, in 23 Henry
VII. (Richard Shakespere on the jury).[44] But there seems to be some
error in the date, as the "Guild of Knowle Records" distinctly state
that Isabella the Prioress was either dead in 19 Henry VII. or had
retired from office.

Elena Cockes, widow, late wife of John Shakespere, and Antony, her son,
appear about this land in a court held by Agnes Little, Prioress of
Wroxhall, April 21, 25 Henry VIII. William Shakespeare and Agnes were
concerned in it, Alice Lone, and many other connected names. A Richard
Shakespere was on the jury, and a Richard Shakespere was appointed
Ale-taster. The Subsidy Rolls do not give a John resident in Wroxall at
any date, but in 14, 15, and 16 Henry VIII. John, senior, and John,
junior, were resident in the adjoining village of Rowington, and in 34
and 37 Henry VIII. there was one John Shakespeare there. In 16 Henry
VIII.[45] there was a Richard Shakespere in Hampton Corley. The name
also occurs at Wroxall in that year and in Rowington in 34-5 Henry VIII.
There were also a Thomas and a Lawrence (mentioned as a cousin in a will
of a John Shakespere, 1574), at Rowington at that time, and the name of
William appears repeatedly in Wroxall. A Robert Shakespere was presented
for non-suit. Rev. Joseph Hunter[46] gives a rental of Rowington 2
Edward VI. Among the free tenants of Lowston End was John Shakespere; at
Mowsley End, Johanna Shakespere, a widow, who seems to have died 1557,
as her will, though lost, is mentioned in the index at Worcester; a
William Shakespere and a Richard Shakespere are also mentioned. In 3
Elizabeth Thomas Shakespere held a messuage in Lowston. In Rowington End
John Shakespere held a cottage called "The Twycroft," and Richard
Shakespere a messuage in Church End at the same time. In the reign of
Edward VI. a Richard Shakespere was on the jury for Hatton, a Court in
the Manor of Wroxall. The Wroxall Parish Registers begin too late to be
of any use (1586). The Wroxall Court Rolls mention in 1523, Richard of
Haseley; 1530-36, Richard and William; 1547, Ralph of Barston.

Ralph[47] Shakespere was on the jury for Berkswell November 11, 4 Edward
VI. and 5 Edward VI. In 1560 Laurence was presented, because he
overburdened the commons with his cattle. John is mentioned in a
transfer of property. Mr. J. W. Ryland gives us invaluable help in his
publication of "The Records of Rowington." John Shakespeer and Robert
Fulwood, gent., are mentioned as feoffees in the will of John Hill of
Rowington, September 23, 1502. John Shakespeare elder and younger are
frequently mentioned in the Charters of Rowington as feoffees or as
witnesses, and a John had a lease of the Harveys for twenty-one years in
1554. A Joan Shakespeare, widow, and her son Thomas, lived at Lyannce in
Hatton in 1547. In the Rental of Rowington, 1560-1, there are mentioned
Thomas, William, John and Richard. Mr. Hunter mentions a Richard
Shakespeyre, at Mansfield, co. Notts, about 1509; a Peter, in 1545; and
a John at Derby, 36 Henry VIII. A Richard Shakespere was assessed at
Hampton Carlew 16 Henry VIII.; Richard Woodham and Richard Shakspere had
a farm at Haseley. The Haseley Registers begin in 1538, and are
interesting for the fact that they record on October 21, 1571, the death
and burial of "Domina Jane," formerly a nun of Wroxall, who would seem
to have been the last sub-prioress, probably connected with Richard
Shakespere, the Bailiff. In 1558 a Roger Shakespere was buried--by some
supposed to be the old monk of Bordesley[48]--who received 100s.
annuity.

The earliest Shakespeare will at Worcester, proved at _Stratford_, was
that of Thomas Shakespere, of Alcester, 1539, who left 20s. each to his
father and mother, Richard and Margaret. He had a wife Margaret and a
son William.[49] Among other Worcester wills is that of Thomas
Shakespere of Warwick, shoemaker, May 20, 1557, who left his wife Agnes
lands in Balsall for life; his daughter Jone, wife to Francis Ley, L4;
to his sons Thomas and John 4 nobles each; and his son William was to be
his heir. Richard Shakysspere of Rowington, weaver, June 15, 1560, left
his property to his sons Richard and William. His brothers-in law John
and William Reve were executors and Richard Shakespeare was a witness.
In 1561 this William Reve in his will left a sheep to Margaret
Shakspere, and in 1565 Robert Shakespeere of Rowington made his will.

But among all these Shakesperes we cannot certainly fix upon any one
that is directly connected with our Shakespeare. It seems _almost_
certain that John Shakespeare was son of Richard Shakespeare, of
Snitterfield. And yet many doubt it on grounds worthy of consideration,
which are treated later in the notice of John Shakespeare. Mr. Yeatman
found that an Alice Griffin, daughter of Edward, and sister of Francis
Griffin of Braybrook, married a Shakespeare. He takes it for granted
that she married Richard of Wroxall, and that it was he who came to
Snitterfield. We must beware of drawing definite conclusions, of making
over-hasty generalizations. We only collect the bricks to help future
investigators to build the edifice.

The Sir Thomas Schakespeir, Curate, of Essex, Bristol and London, who
died 1559, is treated later among the Essex Shakespeares.

There is one curious mention of the name which no student seems to have
worked out. A certain Hugh Saunders, _alias Shakespere_,[50] of Merton
College, Oxford, became Principal of St. Albans Hall in 1501. He was
Vicar of Meopham, in Kent, Rector of Mixbury, Canon of St. Paul's, and
Prebendary of Ealdstreet, in 1508; and Rector of St. Mary's,
Whitechapel, in 1512. He died 1537. Now, such an alias was common at the
time, when a man's mother was of higher social station than his father.
We may therefore, seeing he was somehow connected with Shakespeare,
imagine Hugh Saunders' mother to have been a Shakespeare. He is styled
"vir literis et virtute percelebris."

FOOTNOTES:

[36] "George Shaksper complains against Agnes Marshall that she detains
two rosaries," June 18, 1533.--"Common Trained Soldiers in Nottingham,"
Peter Shakespear, etc., 1596-97. Stevenson's "Nottingham Records."

[37] Halliwell-Phillipps' "Outlines," vol. ii., p. 252.

[38] Guild of Knowle Register.

[39] John Brome was Lord of the Manor of Baddesley Clinton, but was
murdered in the porch of the Church of the White Friars, London,
November 9, 1468, leaving a wife, Beatrice, three sons and two
daughters, one of whom was Jocosa. His son Thomas succeeded, and died
without heirs, and his second son Nicholas then inherited the property.
Eight of his children are registered in the guild of Knowle. His
son-in-law was Sir Edward Ferrers, who married Constance, to whom the
property afterwards came. Their son was Henry Ferrers, the great
Warwickshire antiquary, who succeeded at sixteen, and was Lord of the
Manor for sixty-nine years ("Baddesley Clinton," Rev. H. Norris, p.
234).

[40] Nam Licentia concessa fuit Johanne Shakespere Sub priorisse ad.
eligend., 5 Sept., 1525; et 20 Nov., 1525, Agnes Little confirmata fuit
Priorissa de Wroxall. Vac. per resign. Joc. Brome. Dugdale's
"Monasticon," ed. 1823, vol. iv., p. 89, and "Warwickshire," ed. 1730,
p. 649.

[41] "Valor Ecclesiasticus," 26 Henry VIII. (1535).

[42] Ministers' Accounts, April 24, 28 Henry VIII., and Augmentation
Books, Public Record Office.

[43] Yeatman's "Gentle Shakespeare," pp. 138-142.

[44] Court Rolls, General Series, Portfolio 207, No. 99.

[45] Addit. MSS., Brit. Mus. (24,500).

[46] Mr. Yeatman's "Gentle Shakespeare," p. 142.

[47] Court Roll, No. 10, p. 207.

[48] Nash's "Worcestershire," vol. ii., account of Tardebigg. See
Augmentation Books, October 14, 1539, 233, f. 8.

[49] Hunter's "Prolusions," p. 9.

[50] Wood's Colleges. Fasti Oxoniensis, Bliss, 1815. Wood, Antiq. Oxon.,
L. 2, 341. Boase, Reg. Univ. Oxon. Newcourt's "Repertorium."




CHAPTER IV

THE SHAKESPEARE COAT OF ARMS


[Illustration: NON SANZ DROICT.]

None of the family seem to have risen above the heraldic horizon till
John Shakespeare applied for his coat of arms. Into the contest over
that application it is well to plunge at once, and thence work backwards
and forwards. Four classes of writers wage war over the facts: the
Baconians, like the late Mr. Donnelly, who deny everything; the
Romanticists, who accept what is pleasant, and occasionally believe
manufactured tradition to suit their inclinations; the agnostic
Shakespeareans, like Halliwell-Phillipps, who really work, but believe
only what they can see and touch, if it accords with their opinions; and
the ingenuous workers who seek saving truth like the agnostics, but
bring human influences and natural inferences to bear on dusty records.
Now, Halliwell-Phillipps does not scruple to affirm that three
heralds,[51] the worthy ex-bailiff of Stratford, and the noblest poet
the world has ever produced, were practically liars in this matter,
because they make statements that do not harmonize with the limits of
his knowledge and the colour of his opinions. From his grave the poet
protests--

    "Good name in man or woman, dear my lord,
    Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
    Who steals my purse steals trash....
    But he who filches from me my good name
    Robs me of that, which not enriches him,
    But leaves me poor indeed."

    _Othello_, Act III., Scene 3.

We must therefore at least start inquiry with the supposition that these
men thought they spoke truth. There was no reason they should not have
done so. Sir John Ferne[52] writes: "If any person be advanced into an
office or dignity of publique administration, be it eyther
Ecclesiasticall, Martiall or Civill ... the Herealde must not refuse to
devise to such a publique person, upon his instant request, and
willingness to bear the same without reproche, a Coate of Armes, and
thenceforth to matriculate him with his intermarriages and issues
descending in the Register of the gentle and noble.... In the Civil or
Political State divers Offices of dignitie and worship doe merite Coates
of Armes to the possessours of the same offices, as ... Bailiffs of
Cities and ancient Boroughs or incorporated townes." John Shakespeare
had certainly been Bailiff of Stratford-on-Avon in 1568-9; the draft
states that he then applied for arms, and that the herald, Cooke, had
sent him a "pattern." Probably he did not conclude the negotiations
then, thinking the fees too heavy, or he might have delayed until he
found his opportunity lost, or he might have asked them for his year of
office alone. No doubt John Shakespeare was deeply impressed with the
dignity of his wife's relatives, and wished, even then, to make himself
and his family more worthy for her sake. The tradition of this draft, or
the sight of it, may have stimulated the heart of the good son to honour
his parents by having them enrolled among the _Armigeri_ of the county.
John had appeared among the "gentlemen" of Warwickshire in a government
list of 1580.[53]

The Warwickshire Visitations occur in 1619, after the death of the poet,
without male heirs, and are no help to us here. In the first 1596 draft
the claims are based on John's public office, on a grant to his
antecessors by Henry VII. for special services on marriage with the
daughter and heir of a gentleman of worship (_i.e._, entitled to
armorial bearings). Then a fuller draft was drawn out, also in 1596,
correcting "antecessors" into "grandfather." Halliwell-Phillipps only
mentions one at that date, but Mr. Stephen Tucker,[54] Somerset Herald,
gives facsimiles of both. Halliwell-Phillipps calls these ridiculous
assertions, and asserts that both parties were descended from obscure
country yeomen. The heralds state they were "solicited," and "on
credible report" informed of the facts. We must not forget that all the
friends intimately associated either with the Ardens or the Shakespeares
(with the exception of the Harts) were armigeri.

Nobody now knows anything of that earlier pattern, nor of the patents of
the gifts "to the antecessors." But seeing, as I have seen, that sacks
full of old parchment deeds and bonds, reaching back to the fifteenth
century, get cleared out of lawyers' offices, and sold for small sums to
make drumheads or book-bindings, and seeing that this process has been
going on for 400 years, it does not seem to me surprising that some
deeds do get lost. Generally, it is those we most wish to have that
disappear. Lawyers do not, as a rule, concern themselves with historical
fragments, but with the soundness of the present titles of their clients
and their own modern duties. (I do think that historical and antiquarian
societies should bestir themselves to have old deeds included among the
"ancient monuments of the country" and entitled to some degree of
protection.)

We must also consider how illiterate the inhabitants of the country were
in the reign of Henry VII., how the nation was bestrid by officials of
the Empson and Dudley type, and we have reason to believe that various
accidents, intentional or otherwise, caused many an old grant to
disappear at that period.

It has struck me as possible that John Shakespeare may have intended
ancestors through the female line. The names of his mother and
grandmother are as yet unknown, and the supposition has never been
discussed. But in support of John Shakespeare's claim, and in opposition
to Halliwell-Phillipps's contradiction, we can prove there _were_
Shakespeares in direct service of the Crown, not merely as common
soldiers, though in 28 Henry VIII. (1537), Thomas, Richard, William and
another Richard were mentioned as among the King's forces.[55]

But one Roger Shakespeare was Yeoman of the Chamber to the King, and on
June 9, 1552, shared with his fellows, Abraham Longwel and Thomas Best,
a forfeit of L36 10s.[56] This post of Yeoman of the Chamber was one of
great trust and dignity; it was the same as that held earlier by Robert
Arden, of Yoxall, the younger brother of Sir John Arden, and the
election to it suggested either inherited favour, Court interest, or
signal personal services. His ancestors might have been also the missing
ancestors of John Shakespeare. He himself may be the Roger who was
buried in Haseley in 1558, supposed by some to have been the monk of
Bordesley. He may also have been the father of Thomas Shakespeare, the
Royal Messenger of 1575, noticed later.

This record proves nothing beyond the inexactitude of
Halliwell-Phillipps's sweeping statements, but it gives us a hope that
something else may somewhere else be found to fit into it and make a
fact complete. One of the facts brought forward as a reason for the
grant of arms to John Shakespeare was "that he hath maryed Mary daughter
and one of the heires of Robert Arden in the same countie, Esquire."
"Gent" was originally written, and was altered to "Esquire."[57]

Some have doubted that the grant ever really took place, but Gwillim, in
his "Display of Heraldrie," 1660, notes, "Or, on a bend Sable, a tilting
Spear of the field, borne by the name of Shakespeare, granted by William
Dethick, Garter, to William Shakespear the renowned poet." Shakespeare's
crest, or cognizance, was a "Falcon, his wings displayed, Argent,
standing on a wreath of his colours, supporting a speare, gold." His
motto was, "Non Sans Droict."

It is said there were objections made to this pattern on the ground that
it was too like the old Lord Mauley's.[58] Probably they were only notes
of a discussion among the heralds, when it was decided that the spear
made a "patible difference," and a resume of the qualifications was
added.

This was answered on May 10, 1602, before Henry Lord Howard, Sir Robert
Sidney, and Sir Edward Dier, Chancellor of the Order of the Garter: "The
answere of Garter and Clarencieux Kings of arms, to a libellous scrowle
against certen arms supposed to be wrongfully given. Right Honorable,
the exceptions taken in the Scrowle of Arms exhibited, doo concerne
these armes granted, or the persons to whom they have been granted. In
both, right honourable, we hope to satisfy your Lordships." (They
mention twenty-three cases.) "Shakespere.--It may as well be said that
Hareley, who beareth gould, a bend between two cotizes sables, and all
other that (bear) or and argent a bend sables, usurpe the coat of the
Lo. Mauley. As for the speare in bend, is a patible difference; and the
person to whom it was granted hath borne magestracy, and was justice of
peace at Stratford-upon-Avon. He married the daughter and heire of
Arderne, and was able to maintaine that estate" ("MS. Off. Arm.," W. Z.,
p. 276; from Malone).

It has struck me that the attempt to win arms for his father was in
order to _continue_ them to his mother.

In the Record Office I found the other day a note that explains what I
mean: "At a Chapitre holden by the Office of Armes at the Embroyderers
Hall in London Anno 4^o Reginae Elizabethae it was agreed, that no
inhiritrix eyther mayde wife or widdow should bear or cause to be borne
any Creast or Cognizaunce of her Ancestors otherwise than as followeth.
If she be unmaried to beare in her ringe, cognizaunce or otherwise, the
first coate of her Ancestors in a Lozenge. And during her Widdowhood to
Set the first coate of her husbande in pale with the first coate of her
Auncestor. And if she mary one who is noe gentleman, then she to be
clearly exempted from the former conclusion."[59]

FOOTNOTES:

[51] Cooke, Dethicke and Camden.

In the description of England prefixed to Holinshed's Chronicles it is
stated:

"A gentleman of blood is defined to descend of three descents of
nobleness, that is to saie, of name and of armes both by father and
mother" (p. 161). "Moreover as the King doth dubbe Knights and createth
the barons and higher degrees, so gentlemen whose ancestors are not
knowen to come in with William Duke of Normandie (for of the Saxon races
yet remaining wee now make none accompt, much lesse of the British
issue), doe take their beginning in England, after this manner in our
times. Whosoever studieth the lawes of the realme, whoso abideth in the
Universitie giving his mind to his booke, or professeth physicke and the
liberall sciences, or beside his service in the roome of a captaine in
the warres, or good counsell given at home, whereby his commonwealth is
benefited, can live without manuall labour, and thereto is able and will
beare the port, charge, and countenance of a gentleman, he shall for
monie have a cote and armes bestowed upon him by heralds (who in the
charter of the same doo of custome pretend antiquitie and service, and
manie gaie things) and thereunto being made in good cheape be called
master, which is the title men give to esquires and gentlemen, and
reputed for a gentleman ever after" (Ed. 1586, pp. 161-2).

The same is repeated in "The Commonwealth of England and Maner of
Government thereof," by Sir Thomas Smith, London, 1589-1594, Chap. XX.

In a contemporary play, quoted by John Payne Collier, the herald is made
to say:

    "We now are faine to wait who grows in wealth,
    And comes to beare some office in a towne,
    And we for money help them unto armes,
    For what can not the golden tempter doe?"

            ROBERT WILSON: _The Cobbler's Prophecy_.



[52] Sir John Ferne in "The Glory of Generositie," 1586.

[53] State Papers, Dom. Ser., Eliz., cxxxvii. 68. The gentlemen and
freeholders in the countye of Warwick. Among the freeholders of
Barlichway, John Shakespeare, father of William and Thomas Shakespeare,
69. In Stratford-on-Avon John Shaxspere, and at Rowington Thomas
Shaxpere, April, 1580.

[54] "Miscellanea Genealogica et Heraldica," 2nd Series, 1886, vol. i.,
p. 109, since published in a volume.

[55] The Musters. Archers of Rowington and Wroxall, S.P.D.S.

[56] State Papers, Domestic Series, Edward VI., vol. xiv., Docquet.

[57] Nichols's "Herald and Genealogist," vol. i., p. 510, 1863; and
"Miscel. Gen. et Herald.," Series II., vol. i., p. 109.

[58] See the papers in the Bodleian Library, Ashmol. MS. 846, art. ix.,
f. 50 _a_, _b_. "The answers of Garter and Clarencieux Kings of Arms, to
the Scrowle of Arms, exhibited by Raffe Brookesmouth, caled York
Herald," wherein they state that there is "a patible difference."

[59] State Papers, Domestic Series, Eliz., xxvi. 31, 1561.




CHAPTER V

THE IMPALEMENT OF THE ARDEN ARMS


In the later application to impale the Ardens' arms in 1599, the 1596
draft is repeated in only slightly altered terms. "Antecessors" is
changed to "great-grandfather," and the dignity of Mary Arden's family
further elucidated. Some writers consider that, following a custom of
the day, John Shakespeare treated as _his_ antecessors his wife's
ancestors. The word "_great-grandfather_" tends to exclude this notion,
as may be seen later, but the word "grandfather" would imply, if this
had been intended, that Thomas Arden himself had had the grants. It has
always been supposed that Brooke, York Herald, had exhibited some
complaint against this grant also, as he very possibly did.[60] He was
severely critical of the heraldic and genealogic matter in Camden's
"Britannia," and very bitter at the slighting way the author speaks of
heralds. He wrote a book called "The Discoveries of Certaine Errours in
the edition of 1594," which he seems to have begun at once, as on page
14 he states, "If the making of gentlemen heretofore hath been greatly
misliked by her Majestie in the Kinges of Armes; much more displeasing,
I think, it will be to her, that you, _being no Officer of Armes_,
should erect, make and put down Earles and Barons at your pleasure." It
must have been peculiarly galling to him that by the influence of Sir
Fulke Greville, afterwards Lord Brooke, Camden was advanced over his
head to the dignity he himself desired. After being appointed, for
form's sake, Richmond Herald for one day, Camden was made Clarenceux,
October 23, 1597, between the first and second Shakespeare drafts. This
probably decided Brooke to publish his "Pamphlet of Errors," which, as
he dedicated it to the Earl of Essex, "Lord General of the Royal Forces
in Ireland," must have appeared in 1599. He wrote another book against
Camden, which was forbidden to be published.

The draft for the impalement is also heavily corrected, probably in
comparison and discussion. Of the Shakespeare shield a note adds: "The
person to _whom it was granted_ hath borne magistracy in
Stratford-on-Avon, was Justice of the Peace, married the daughter and
heir of Arderne, and was able to maintain that estate." The Heralds
first tricked the arms of the Ardens of Park Hall, Ermine a fesse chequy
or and az., but scratched them out, and substituted a shield bearing
three cross crosslets fitchee and a chief or, with a martlet for
difference.

I put forward several suggestions concerning this question in an article
in the _Athenaeum_.[61]

The critical strictures against the Shakespeare-Arden claim are best
summed up by Mr. Nichols:[62]

1. That the relation of Mary Arden to the Ardens of Park Hall was
imaginary and impossible, and those who assert it in error. 2. That the
Ardens were connected with nobility, while Robert Arden was a mere
"husbandman." 3. That the Heralds knew the claim was unfounded when they
scratched out the arms of Arden of Park Hall, and replaced them by the
arms of the Ardens of Alvanley, of Cheshire. This was equally
unjustifiable, but as the family lived further off, there was less
likelihood of complaint.

Now we must work out the case step by step on the other side.

Robert Arden, of Park Hall, spent his substance during the Wars of the
Roses, and was finally brought to the block (30 Henry VI.,[63] 1452).
His son Walter was restored by Edward IV., but he would probably be
encumbered by debts and "waste"; at least, he had but small portions to
leave to his family when he made his will[64] (31 July, 17 Henry VII.,
1502). Besides his heir, Sir John, Esquire of the Body to Henry VII., he
had a second son,[65] Thomas, to whom he leaves _ten_ marks annually; a
third son, Martin, who was to have the manor of Natford; if not, then
Martin and his other sons--Robert, Henry, William--should each of them
have _five_ marks annually. This is an income too small even for younger
sons to live on in those days, so it is to be supposed the father had
already either placed them, married them well, or otherwise provided for
them during his life. Among the witnesses to the will are "Thomas Arden
and John Charnells, Squires." Thomas, being the second son, might have
had something from his mother Eleanor, daughter and coheir of John
Hampden, of Great Hampden, county Bucks. This Thomas was alive in 1526,
because Sir John Arden then willed that his brothers--Thomas, Martin,
and Robert--should have their fees for life. Henry, and probably also
William, had meanwhile died, though a William seems to have been
established at Hawnes, in Bedfordshire. Seeing that Sir John was the
Esquire of the Body to Henry VII., it seems very probable that his
brother Robert was the Robert Arden, Yeoman of the Chamber, to whom
Henry VII. granted three patents: First, on February 22, 17 Henry VII.,
as Keeper of the Park at Altcar,[66] Lancashire; and second, as Bailiff
of Codmore, Derby,[67] and Keeper of the Royal Park there; the third[68]
gave him Yoxall for life, at a rental of L42--afterwards confirmed.
Indeed, Leland in his "Itinerary" mentions the relationship,[69] and the
administration of Robert's goods proves it.

Martin's family became connected with the Easts and the Gibbons, and his
name and arms appear in the "Visitations of Oxfordshire." Where
meanwhile was Thomas? There is no record of any Thomas Arden in
Warwickshire or elsewhere, ever supposed to be the son of Walter Arden,
save the Thomas who, the year before Walter Arden's death, was living at
Wilmecote, in the parish of Aston Cantlowe, on soil formerly owned by
the Beauchamps. On May 16, 16 Henry VII., Mayowe transferred certain
lands at Snitterfield to "Robert Throckmorton, Armiger, Thomas Trussell
of Billesley, Roger Reynolds of Henley-in-Arden, William Wood of
Woodhouse, Thomas Arden of Wilmecote, and Robert Arden, the son of this
Thomas Arden." This list is worth noting. Thomas Trussell, of an old
family, is identified by his residence.[70] He was Sheriff of the county
in 23 Henry VII. No Throckmorton could take precedence of him save the
Robert Throckmorton of Coughton, who was knighted six months later.[71]

These men were evidently acting as trustees for the young Robert Arden.
Just in the same way this same Robert Throckmorton was appointed by
Thomas's elder brother, Sir John Arden of Park Hall, as trustee for his
children, in association with John Kingsmel, Sergeant-at-Law, Sir
Richard Empson, and Sir Richard Knightley.[72] That a man of the same
name, at the same time, in the same county, retaining the same family
friends, in circumstances in every way suitable to the second son of
Walter Arden, should be accepted for that man seems just and natural,
especially _when no other claimant has ever been brought forward_.

But we _know_ this Thomas Arden was Mary Arden's grandfather; this
Robert was her father; this property, that tenanted afterwards by the
Shakespeares, and left by Robert's will to his family.

As the deed of conveyance of the premises at Snitterfield from Mayowe to
Arden has been often referred to, occasionally quoted, but never, so far
as I know, printed _in extenso_, I should like to preserve the copy. It
may save trouble to future investigators, and help to clear up the
connection between the Shakespeares and the Ardens. It certainly
strengthens very much Mary Arden's claim to connection with the Ardens
of Park Hall, and her descent from "a gentleman of worship," a claim the
heralds allowed.

"Sciant presentes et futuri quod ego Johannes Mayowe de Snytterfeld
dedi, concessi, et hac presenti carta mea confirmavi, Roberto
Throkmerton Armigero, Thome Trussell de Billesley, Rogero Reynoldes de
Henley in Arden, Willelmo Wodde de Wodhouse, Thome Arderne de Wylmecote,
et Roberto Arderne filio eiusdem Thome Arderne, unum mesuagium cum suis
pertinenciis in Snytterfeld predicta, una cum omnibus et singulis terris
toftis, croftis, pratis, pascuis et pasturis eidem mesuagio spectantibus
sive pertinentibus in villa et in campis de Snytterfeld predicta cum
omnibus suis pertinenciis; quod quidem mesuagium predictum quondam fuit
Willelmi Mayowe et postea Johannis Mayowe et situatum est inter terram
Johannis Palmer ex parte una et quandam venellam ibidem vocatam
Merellane ex parte altera in latitudine et extendit se in longitudine a
via Regia ibidem usque ad quendam Rivulum, secundum metas et divisas
ibidem factas. Habendum et tenendum predictum mesuagium cum omnibus et
singulis terris Toftis, Croftis, pratis, pascuis, et pasturis predictis,
ac omnibus suis pertinenciis prefatis Roberto Throkmerton, Thome
Trussell, Rogero Reynoldes, Willelmo Wodde, Thome Arderne et Roberto
Ardern heredibus et assignatis suis de capitalibus dominis feodi illius
per servicia inde debita et de jure consueta imperpetuum. Et ego vero
predictus Johannes Mayowe et heredes mei mesuagium predictum cum omnibus
et singulis terris Toftis Croftis, pratis, pascuis et pasturis
supradictis ac omnibus suis pertinenciis prefatis Roberto Throckmerton,
Thome Trussell, Rogero Reynoldes, Willelmo Wodde, Thome Arderne et
Roberto Arderne heredibus et assignatis suis contra omnes gentes
Warrantizabimus et defendemus imperpetuum.

"Et insuper sciatis me prefatum Johannem Mayowe assignasse, constituisse
et in loco meo posuisse dilectos michi in Christo Thomam Clopton de
Snytterfeld predicta gentilman et Johannem Porter de eadem meos veros et
legitimos Attornatos conjunctim et divisim ad intrandum vice et nomine
meo in predictum mesuagium cum omnibus et singulis premissis et
pertinenciis suis quibuscunque et ad plenam et pacificam seisinam pro me
ac vice et nomine meo inde capiendam et postquam hujusmodi seisina dicta
capta fuerit ad deliberandam pro me ac vice et nomine meo prefatis
Roberto Throkmerton, Thome Trussell, Rogero Reynoldes, Willelmo Wodde,
Thome Arderne et Roberto Arderne plenam et pacificam possessionem et
seisinam de et in eodem mesuagio ac omnibus et singulis premissis,
secundum vim, formam et effectum huius presentis carte mee. Ratum et
gratum habens et habiturus totum et quicquid dicti attornati mei vice et
nomine meo fecerint seu eorum alter fecerit in premisses. In cuius rei
testimonium huic presenti carte mee et scripto meo sigillum meum
apposui. Hiis testibus Johanne Wagstaffe de Aston Cauntelowe Roberto
Porter de Snytterfield predicta Ricardo Russheby de eadem, Ricardo
Atkyns de Wylmecote predicta, Johanne Alcokkes de Newenham et aliis.
Datum apud Snytterfield predictam die lune proximo post festum
invencionis Sancte Crucis Anno Regni Regis Henrici Septimi post
conquestum Sexto decimo."[73]

Mr. Nichols' second objection was that in records he is styled
"husbandman"; but the word is an old English equivalent for a farmer, in
which sense it is often used in old wills and records. And in the
examination of John Somerville,[74] Edward Arden's son-in-law (also of
high descent), he stated "that he had received no visitors of late, but
certain 'husbandmen,' near neighbours." The Arden "husbandman" of
Wilmecote in 1523 and 1546[75] paid the same amount to the subsidy as
the Arden Esquire of Yoxall[76] in 1590, when money was of less value.

Mr. Nichols' third assertion, that the heralds scratched out the arms of
the Ardens of Park Hall, because they _dared_ not quarter them with
those of the Shakespeares, shows that he omitted certain considerations.
That family was under attainder then.

Drummond[77] exemplifies many arms of Arden, and traces them back to
their derivation. He notices that the "elder branch of the Ardens took
the arms of the old Earls of Warwick; the younger branches took the arms
of the Beauchamps, with a difference. In this they followed the custom
of the Earls of Warwick." The Ardens of Park Hall therefore bore ermine,
a fesse chequy, or, and az., arms derived from the old Earls of Warwick;
and this was the pattern scratched out in John Shakespeare's quartering.
But the reason lay in no breach of connection, but in the fact that Mary
Arden was an heiress, not in the eldest line, but through a _second
son_. A possible pattern for a younger son was three cross crosslets
fitchee and a chief or. As such they were borne by the Ardens of
Alvanley, with a crescent for difference. They were borne without the
crescent by Simon Arden of Longcroft,[78] the second son of the next
generation, and full cousin of Mary Arden's father. It is true that
among the tombs at Yoxall the fesse chequy appeared, but there is
evident confusion in their use. Martin Arden of Euston was probably in
the wrong to assume when he did the arms of his elder brother; William
Arden of Hawnes, if the sixth son, county Bedford, bore the same arms as
those proposed for Mary Arden, and it is implied that Thomas, her
father, had borne them. In the Heralds' College is the draft:
"Shakespere impaled with the Aunceyent armes of the said Arden of
Willingcote" (volume marked R. 21 outside and G. XIII. inside).

If the three cross crosslets fitchee were the correct arms for Thomas
Arden as the second son of an Arden, who might bear ermine, a fesse
chequy or, and az., the crescent would have been the correct difference,
but it had long been borne by the Ardens of Alvanley, in Cheshire, who
branched off from the Warwickshire family early in the thirteenth
century. The heralds therefore differenced the crosslets with a martlet,
usually, but by no means universally, the mark of cadency for a fourth
son at that time.[79] Thus, Glover[80] enumerates among the arms of
Warwickshire and Bedfordshire: "Arden or Arderne gu., three cross
crosslets fitchee or; on a chief of the second a martlet of the first.
Crest, a plume of feathers charged with a martlet or." If heraldry has
anything, therefore, to say to this dispute, it is to support the claim
of Thomas Arden to being a cadet of the Park Hall family, and thereby to
include Mary Arden and her son in the descent from Ailwin, Guy of
Warwick, and the Saxon King Athelstan. Camden and the other heralds were
only seeking correctness in their draft of the restitution of the
Ardens' arms. The hesitation as to exactitude among the varieties of
Arden arms was the cause of the notes. See "The Booke of Differ.," 61;
see "Knights of E.I.," folios 2, 28, etc., on the draft.

It has been considered strange that, after the application and even
after the grant (preserved in MS. "Coll. of Arms," R. 21), no use
thereof can be proved, though the heralds added to the former grant:
"and we have lykewise uppon an other escucheon impaled the same with the
auncient arms of the said Arden of Wellyngcote, signifying thereby that
it maye and shalbe lawfull, for the said John Shakespeare, gent., to
beare and use the same shields of arms, single or impaled, as aforesaid,
during his natural lyfe, and that it shalbe lawful for his children,
issue, and posterity, to beare, use, quarter, and shewe the same with
their dewe difference, in all lawfull warlyke faites and civill use"
(_Ibid._, G. XIII.).

John Shakespeare did not live long after his application, dying in 1601.

Whether or not the grant of the impaled Arden arms was completed before
his death, there is no record of his using them. Whether his son ever
used the impalement we do not now know, but it does not appear on any of
the tombs or seals that have been preserved. But the Shakespeare arms
have been certainly used.

William Shakespeare was mercilessly satirized by his rivals, Ben Jonson
and others,[81] about his coat of arms; but it was the recognition of
his descent that secured him so universally the attribute of "gentle."
As Davies, addressing Shakespeare and Burbage in 1603, says:

    "And though the stage doth stain pure gentle blood,
    Yet generous ye are in mind and mood."[82]

We must not forget there would be possible ill-feeling among the
families of the Arden sisters, when the youngest, whom they had probably
always pitied and looked down on, because of her comparatively
unfortunate marriage, should have the audacity to think of using the
arms of their father, to which they had never aspired.

[Illustration: OLD HOUSE AT WILMECOTE, BY SOME SUPPOSED TO BE ROBERT
ARDEN'S.

_To face p. 35._]

FOOTNOTES:

[60] He tried in every way to prove Camden wrong, but his bitterness
only hurt himself. His strictures were confuted before the highest
authority.

[61] August 10, 1895, p. 202.

[62] "Herald and Genealogist," vol. i., p. 510, 1863; and _Notes and
Queries_, Series III., vol. v., p. 493.

[63] Dugdale's "Warwickshire," p. 925.

[64] Preserved at Somerset House, 8 Porch.

[65] Dugdale places the sons in another order.

[66] Pat. Henry VII., second part, mem. 30, February 22.

[67] Same series, mem. 35, September 9.

[68] Pat. 23 Henry VIII., September 24, first part, mem. 12.

[69] "Arden of the court, brother to Sir John Arden of Park Hall."
"Itinerary," vi. 20, about 1536-42.

[70] Sir Warine Trussell held Billesley 15 Edward III. The will of Sir
William Trussell of Cublesdon, 1379, mentions a bequest to his cousin,
"Sir Thomas d'Ardene" ("Testamenta Vetusta," Sir N. H. Nicolas, vol. i.,
p. 107). William Trussell was made a brother of the Guild of Knowle
1469, and there is an entry in 1504 of a donation "for Sir William
Trussell and for his soul": "To Thomas Trussell, farmer of the said
Bishop of Worcester; in Knowle for the Worke-silver 4/4" (37 Henry
VIII., Report. "Register of the Guild of Knowle," Introduction, p.
xxvi., by Mr. W. B. Bickley). Alured Trussell, born 1533, married
Margaret, daughter of Robert Fulwood, and their daughter Dorothy married
Adam Palmer, Robert Arden's friend. French thinks that the wife, either
of Thomas or of Robert, was a Trussell.

[71] His son George succeeded him in 1520. Edward Arden, of Park Hall,
was brought up in his care, and married Mary, his son Robert's daughter.

[72] See p. 184.

[73] Deed of Conveyance of Premises at Snytterfield. (Transcribed from
the Miscellaneous Documents of Stratford-on-Avon), vol. ii., No. 83.

[74] State Papers, Domestic Series, Elizabeth, 1583, clxiii., 21.

[75] In the Subsidy Rolls 15 Henry VII., Thomas Arden was assessed on
L12, and Robert Arden on L8 (192/128). Subsidy, Aston Cantlowe, March
10, 37 Henry VIII., 1546, Robert Arden, assessed on property valued at
L10; Walter Edkyns, L10; John Jenks, L6; John Skarlett, L8; Thomas
Dixson, L8; Roger Knight, L8; Richard Ingram, L6; Thomas Gretwyn, L5;
Margaret Scarlet, L5; Richard Edkyns, L6; Robert Fulwood, L5; Nicholas
Gibbes, L5; Richard Green, L5; William Hill, L5 (Mr. Hunter's
"Prolusions," 37, note). Thomas Arden of Park Hall at the same time was
assessed on L80; but Simon Arden was only assessed on L8 (192/179).

[76] French, "Genealogica Shakespeareana," p. 423; and Nichols' "History
of Leicestershire."

[77] H. Drummond's "Noble British Families," vol. i. (2).

[78] See Fuller's "Worthies of Warwickshire."

[79] "The several marks of cadency which have _of late years_ been made
use of for the distinction of houses ... for the second son a crescent,
the third a mullet, the fourth a martlet" (Glover's "Heraldry," vol. i.,
p. 168, ed. 1780).

[80] _Ibid._, vol. ii., ed. 1780.

[81] In the "Return from Parnassus," 1606, Studiosus says of the
players:

    "Vile world that lifts them up to high degree,
    And treads us down in grovelling misery,
    England affords these glorious vagabonds
    That carried erst their fardels on their backs
    Coursers to ride on through the gazing streets,
    Sweeping it in their glaring satin suits,
    And pages to attend their masterships.
    With mouthing words that better wits have framed,
    They purchase lands and now esquires are made."

                ACT V., SC. 1.

The satire in "Ratsey's Ghost" also may refer to Shakespeare, though
Alleyn and others might be intended.

Freeman, in his "Epigrams," 1614, asks:

    "Why hath our age such new-found 'gentles' found
    To give the 'master' to the farmer's son?"

But his high praise of Shakespeare elsewhere shows he does not refer to
him.

[82] John Davies of Hereford's "Microcosmus, The Civil Warres of Death
and Fortune."




CHAPTER VI

THE ARDENS OF WILMECOTE


It is unfortunate that we know so little about Thomas Arden, Mary
Shakespeare's "antecessor." A quiet country gentleman he seems to have
been, marrying for love, and not for property, or his wife's descent
might have helped us to clear his own. I do not think she was a
Throckmorton, but I think she was very probably a Trussell, which Mr.
French also suggests. Joane was a Trussell name, and Billesley held some
attraction to the family. We are not sure of anything about Thomas
except the purchase of Snitterfield, the year before Sir Walter Arden's
death, and his payment of the subsidies in 1526 and 1546. It is probable
he was the "Thomas Arden, Squier," who witnessed the will of Sir Walter
in 1502; it is _possible_ he was the Thomas Arden who witnessed the will
of John Lench[83] of Birmingham in 1525, though it is more likely that
this latter Thomas was his nephew, the heir of Park Hall. Thomas of
Wilmecote is supposed to have died in 1546, but no will has been
discovered. Probably he had handed over his property to his son in his
lifetime. There is no trace of another child than Robert.

Robert was probably under age when his father purchased Snitterfield,
and hence the need of trustees in association with the purchase. On
December 14 and 21, 1519, Robert Arden purchased another property in
Snitterfield from Richard Rushby and Agnes his wife,[84] and he bought
also a tenement from John Palmer on October 1, 1529.[85] One of his
tenants was Richard Shakespeare. He and his tenant were both presented
for non-suit of court in 30 Henry VIII.

He contributed to the subsidy in Wilmecote in 1526 and 1546. We know no
more of his first wife than we know of his mother. She might have been
either a Trussel or a Palmer. But we know that he had seven[86]
daughters, who all bore Arden family names: _Agnes_, who married first
John Hewyns, and secondly Thomas Stringer, by whom she had two sons,
John and Arden Stringer; _Joan_, who married Edmund Lambert, of
Barton-on-the-Heath, who had a son, John Lambert; _Katharine_, who
married Thomas Edkyns of Wilmecote, who had a son, Thomas Edkyns the
younger; _Margaret_, who married first Alexander Webbe of Bearley (by
whom she had a son Robert), and secondly Edward Cornwall; _Joyce_, of
whom there is no record but in her father's settlement and will;[87]
_Alice_, who was one of the co-executors of her father's will, but of
whom there is no further record; and _Mary_, the other executor, who
married John Shakespeare. The exact dates of their birth are not known.
Robert may be supposed to have been married about 1520, and it is
probable that Mary was born about 1535. It is _likely_ that she was of
age when made executor in 1556, but not at all _necessary_.

Robert Arden married again when his family had grown up--probably in
1550--Agnes Webbe, who had been assessed as the widow of Hill of Bearley
on L7, in 37 Henry VIII., 1546. On July 17, 1550, Robert Arden made two
settlements of the Snitterfield estates, probably upon his marriage.[88]
In the first,[89] he devised estates at Snitterfield in trust to Adam
Palmer and Hugh Porter, for the benefit, after the death of himself and
his wife, of his three married daughters--Agnes, Joan and Katharine. In
the second, a similar deed,[90] in favour of three other
daughters--Margaret (then married to Alexander Webbe of Bearley), Joyce
and Alice. Mary is not mentioned, probably because the Asbies estate was
even then devoted to her.

Robert Arden, sick in body, but good and perfect of remembrance, made
his last will and testament[91] November 23, 1556, and he must have died
shortly after. This will of itself answers the question as to his
worldly position, and as to the meaning of the word "husbandman" in his
case. The wage of a working "husbandman" at the time was from 25s. to
33s. a year.[92] His will discloses property on a level with many
"_gentlemen_" of his time and his county. It gives a strong suggestion
that Mrs. Arden was not on the best of terms with her stepchildren.
Robert bequeathed his soul "to God and the blessed Lady Saint Mary, and
all the holye company of heaven," and his body to be buried in the
churchyard of Saint John the Baptist at Aston Cantlowe. "Also I
bequeathe to my youngest daughter Marye all my land at Willincote
caulide Asbyes, and the crop upon the grownde sown and tythde as hitt is
... and vi^li xiii^s iiii^d of money to be paid her or ere my goodes be
devided. Also I gyve and bequeathe to my daughter Ales, the thyrde parte
of all my goodes moveable and unmoveable in fylde and towne after my
dettes and leggessese performyde, besydes that goode she hath of her
owne all this tyme. Allso I give and bequethe to Agnes my wife vi^li
xiii^s iiii^d upon this condysion that she shall sofer my dowghter Ales
quyetly to ynjoye half my copyhold in Wyllincote during the tyme of her
wyddewoode; and if she will nott soffer my dowghter Ales quyetly to
occupy half with her, then I will that my wyfe shall have but iii^li
vi^s viii^d, and her gintur in Snytterfelde. Item, I will that the
residew of all my goodes, moveable and unmovable, my funeralles and my
dettes dyschargyd, I gyve and bequeathe to my other children to be
equaleye devidide amongeste them by the descreshyon of Adam Palmer, Hugh
Porter of Snytterfelde, and Jhon Skerlett, whom I do orden and make my
overseers of this my last will and testament, and they to have for their
peynes takyng in this behalfe xx^s apece. Allso I orden and constitute
and make my full exequtores Ales and Marye my dawghters of this my last
will and testament, and they to have no more for their paynes takyng now
as afore geven to them. Allso I gyve and bequethe to every house that
hath no teeme in the paryche of Aston, to every house iiii^d. Thes being
witnesses Sir William Bouton Curett, Adam Palmer, Jhon Skerlett, Thomas
Jhenkes, William Pytt, with other mo." Proved at Worcester, December 16,
1556, by Alice and Mary Arden. It is interesting to learn from the
inventory the nature of the furniture, and the prices of the period.
There were eleven "painted cloths" in the various rooms, the substitutes
for ancient tapestry even in good homes.

The value of the goods, movable and unmovable, independently of the
landed property, was calculated to be L76 11s. 10d. This was a large sum
for the period. Probably even then the goods were worth much more, as
the prices entered are relatively low for the date. Certainly it is
necessary to multiply the value by ten to translate it into modern
figures, and that would give a good estimate for the saleable value of a
houseful of furniture now.

After her sister's and her stepmother's legacies of L6 13s. 4d., after
the payment of 4d. to every family in the parish, and of 20s. to the
overseers, all debts being paid, Alice was to have a third--that is, the
third that by old English law belonged to the dead. She would thus have
at least L13 worth in kind, along with her interest in Snitterfield and
what goods "she had of her own." The others would have about L5 each. It
may be noted the widow was left no furniture or goods. She may have
claimed the widow's third, though the effect of her jointure was to
disturb the law of dower. She seems to have had furniture of her own.
She evidently stayed on in her husband's home, and apparently brought
her own children there.

Mary Hill was married to John Fulwood, November 15, 1561, at Aston
Cantlow. Agnes Arden, widow, made her will in 1578. The opinion that
there was no great friendliness with her husband's family is
strengthened thereby, yet there was not the absolute estrangement some
writers have supposed. Halliwell-Phillipps states that she does not
mention a member of her husband's family. She left legacies to the poor,
to her godchildren, to her grandchildren, and the residue to her son and
son-in-law in trust for their children. She left twelve pence to John
Lambert, her stepdaughter Joan's son, and twelve pence to each of her
brother Alexander Webbe's children, one of whom, at least, was the son
of her stepdaughter Margaret. She left nothing to any of her
stepdaughters, and nothing to any of the young Shakespeares. The
overseers were Adam Palmer and George Gibbs; so she had been able to
keep friendly with her husband's friend. The witnesses were Thomas
Edkins (a stepdaughter's husband), Richard Petyfere, and others. She was
buried on December 29, 1580, and the inventory of her goods was taken
January 19, 1580-81. The low rate at which it is calculated is
remarkable. "Item 38 sheep L3; fivescore pigs L13 4s.," etc. The sum
total was L45. The will was proved on March 31, 1581.

The friendliness between the Shakespeares and the other Arden families
seems to have been unstable. Aunt Joan's husband, Edmund Lambert, of
Barton-on-the-Heath, and their son John, through rather sharp practice
for cousinly customs, became owners of Asbies. There is a hazy suspicion
even about the bona fides of the Edkins. Agnes had settled rather far
off at the home of the Stringers, in Stockton, co. Salop. In February,
1569, Thomas Stringer devised to Alexander Webbe his share of
Snitterfield. John Shakespeare was one of the witnesses to the
indenture. Alexander Webbe, it is true, made John Shakespeare, his
brother-in-law, the overseer of his will at his death in 1573.

Joyce Arden and Alice Arden seem both to have died unmarried, without
leaving a will. There is no further mention of Alice, the wealthier of
the two maiden sisters, resident at Aston Cantlow, neither has there
hitherto been made any suggestion concerning Joyce, and her death does
not appear in the parish registers. Now, it was an exceedingly common
custom of the time for poorer single relatives to enter into the service
of wealthier members of the family; for "superfluous women" even, who
were not poor, to go where they were wanted in other homes. Might she
not have gone in such a capacity to one of the houses of the Ardens of
Park Hall? In Worcestershire, near Stourbridge, there is a parish called
Pedmore, and a hall of the same name, then inhabited by the Arden
family. The registers there record the death of a "Mistress Joyce Arden"
in 1557, to whose family there is no clue: and I cannot but think she
was Shakespeare's aunt, as the Joyce of Park Hall was married.

The Webbes[93] gradually bought up the reversionary shares of the other
Arden sisters in Snitterfield, and held the whole as tenants under Mrs.
Arden, widow. But the story of the Shakespeares' transfer is so
curiously mixed up with their other actions that they must be taken
together, in order to get a contemporary view of the matter. We find
that John Shakespeare had apparently pinched himself in 1575 to purchase
two houses in Stratford-on-Avon for L40, believed to be in Henley
Street[94]. By 1578, for some reasons not explained, he was excused his
share in municipal charges[95], and by a will of "Roger Sadler" Baker in
that year, we know that he was in debt to him, and under circumstances
that necessitated a security. "Item of Edmund Lambert and ---- Cornish
for the debte of Mr. John Shakesper v^li[96]." John Shakespeare
mortgaged Asbies to Edmund Lambert for a loan of L40 on November 14,
1578[97], the fine being levied Easter, 1579, the mortgagee treating the
matter as a purchase[98].

There is a curious complexity caused by a lease of the same property
being apparently granted to George Gibbes, and a double fine
levied[99]--_i.e._, parties brought in who were strangers to the title;
and a double fine appears to have been levied for technical purposes
when the estate was entailed[100]. These other names were Thomas Webbe
and Humphrey Hooper[101]. The mortgage loan was made repayable at
Michaelmas, 1580, when the lease commenced to run, and things seemed to
have been made safe for the Shakespeares. Then they proceeded to sell a
parcel[102] of the Snitterfield property to Robert Webbe for L40 on
October 15, 1579. The description is worded loosely: "John Shakespeare
yeoman and Mary his wife ... all that theire moietye, parte and partes,
be yt more or lesse, of and in twoo messuages," etc. The indenture is
long[103], and written in English, and would seem to have been signed at
Wilmcote[104].

A bond was drawn up on the 25th of the same month, carrying a penalty of
twenty marks against the Shakespeares if they infringed the above
conditions, also signed in the presence of Nicholas Knolles, the Vicar
of Auston or Alveston[105]. Another deed, the final concord,[106] is
drawn up in Latin: "in curia domine Regine apud Westmonasterium a die
Pasche in quindecim dies anno regnorum Elizabethe ... vicesimo secundo
... inter Robertum Webbe querentem et Johannem Shackspere et Mariam
uxorem ejus, deforciantes _de sexta parte duarum partium duorum
messuagiorum_ ... idem Robertus dedit predictis Johannis et Marie
quadraginta libras sterlingorum." On this sale Robert Webbe paid a fine
of 6s. 8d. for licence of entry to the Sheriff of the County.[107]

Now, this apparently second sale has puzzled many Shakespeareans, as
well as the "fraction." Even Halliwell-Phillipps[108] supposes that
"John Shakespeare had some small interest in Snitterfield of his own,"
which he parted with for L4, and that "Mary Shakespeare was entitled
to a share through an earlier settlement." Others have thought, however,
that the first was but a draught deed of the indenture, the L4 the
earnest money, and the "final concord" for L40 the conclusion of the
whole. This is supported by the absolute indefiniteness of the first as
to part or parts in two messuages, and by the apparent definiteness of
the second. But the peculiar wording has further puzzled many writers.
In referring to Robert Arden's settlements, we find that one tenement is
settled upon three daughters, and the other tenement settled upon other
three daughters, Mary's name not being mentioned. How, then, was she
empowered to sell any share? It could only be by inheritance or by gift
from some of her other sisters. The course of events showed it was not
of free gift. But Joyce and Alice had apparently vanished from the
scene. If they left no will, their shares would be divisible into equal
parts among their surviving sisters by common law, and through her
fraction of their shares Mary Shakespeare could step in as part owner of
Snitterfield. Now, it is quite possible that the first sale of 1579 was
an indefinite sale of Mary's share of Joyce's portion; and it is
possible that Alice died in that year, and increased the share of her
sisters, so that the two portions were treated together in the deed of
1580. Seeing that the two portions of the property had long been held
together by the Webbes, it is quite natural to read "the sixth part of
two" rather than "the third of one," as each sister originally read her
share. Now, if Mary had lost both of her sisters, it is quite natural to
read her share as "the sixth part of two _parts_ or portions of two
tenements." This has not yet been thus simply explained. But it is not
strictly correct; for while the share of the first sister would bring
Mary "the sixth part of one part of two tenements," the death of the
second sister should have secured her the _fifth part_ of one part of
two tenements, plus the fraction already inherited by the second from
the first, or, more simply, the fifth part of two parts of two
tenements. It was near enough, however, for all practical purposes, and
Robert Webbe seems duly to have handed over the money to John
Shakespeare. Robert Webbe's eagerness to buy, and the Shakespeares' need
of the money, seems to have determined the price. Forty pounds was a
large sum for such a fraction of the whole. Robert Webbe's readiness may
be accounted for, because he was on the eve of marriage. There was a new
settlement[109] of estates at Snitterfield on the occasion of his
marriage to Mary, daughter of John Perkes, September 1, 23 Elizabeth,
and an agreement between Edward Cornwall[110] (stepfather to Robert
Webbe) and William Perkes, respecting an estate in Snitterfield, and a
proviso against any claim from the Ardens.

But it was not from the Ardens that any difficulty arose. Before the
death of Mrs. Agnes Arden, she was called to support her claim and that
of all her stepdaughters, based on a supposition of entail, against the
descendants of the Mayowe who had sold his property to Thomas and Robert
Arden in 1501. Being described as old and infirm, a Commission was
directed to Bartholomew Hales, Lord of the Manor of Snitterfield, and
Nicholas Knolles, Vicar of Alveston, to take her deposition concerning
it, in July, 1580.[111] She died in December of that year; and in 1582
John Shakespeare,[112] and his brother Henry, and Adam Palmer, with
others, were called on to give evidence in the case between Thomas
Mayowe and Robert Webbe, before Sir Fulk Grevyle, Sir Thomas Lucy,
Humphrey Peto, and William Clopton, Commissioners. Their depositions in
support of the deed of transfer seem to have been sufficient, and we
hear no more of Mayowe. The newly-married couple settled down on the
inheritance of the Ardens, and the old home of the Shakespeares.

Concerning Mary Arden's special inheritance at Asbies, there is a sadder
story to tell. Whether John Shakespeare could read or not, he was
certainly not a Latin scholar, and though not ignorant of many points of
common law, was not up to all the technicalities used at times to
confuse the truth. It is evident that there had been some verbal
agreement between him and Edmund Lambert on which he relied, but that
the written deed was all that John Lambert accepted.[113] On selling the
main portion of his wife's property at Snitterfield, John Shakespeare
seems to have walked right off with the money to Edmund Lambert, of
Barton-on-the-Heath, to redeem his mortgage, and reinstate himself as
owner of Asbies, free to grant a lease or sale on his own terms. But
through a quibble, which "was not in the bond," Edmund Lambert refused
to accept this until certain other debts were also paid. Thereby he
gained the shelter of time, which "was in the bond," and put Shakespeare
at a legal disadvantage, though it is evident from the later papers that
a verbal agreement had taken place to extend the time, seeing that the
money had been tendered. We may be sure that the property was worth more
than L40 in hard cash to either, and more, in romantic associations, to
the Shakespeares. For it was a part of Thomas Arden's original property.
How he came by it, no one is sure. French[114] suggests it might have
been given him by the Beauchamps of Bergavenny, who had intermarried
with the Ardens, and had been more than once known to have been in
friendly relations. The guardian of Robert Arden, his grandfather, had
been the Lady of Bergavenny, and Elizabeth Beauchamp was godmother to
Elizabeth Arden, daughter of Walter and sister of Thomas, whom we take
to be the Thomas of Aston Cantlow.

Edmund Lambert died in 1587, and his son John seems to have been
threatened by the Shakespeares with a law-suit for the recovery of
Asbies, and proposed as a compromise to pay a further sum of L20,
thereby securing Asbies as by purchase. To this, however, the consent,
not only of Mary, but of William, her heir, was necessary, and the poet
is supposed to have come down to Stratford on the occasion to act with
his parents. But probably there was some other hitch: the L20 may have
been held to be covered by the "other debts," which already had done
service for Edmund Lambert; or the Shakespeares weighed their desire to
have back the land, which they probably then wished, with their growing
family, to farm themselves. Nothing seems then to have been settled, and
they were too poor to risk the perils of a great law-suit. Doubtless,
with sad hearts and bitter retrospect, they regretted their unlucky
purchases in 1575, which seemed to have pinched them so, and wished at
least they had been contented with the half, with the one tenement in
Henley Street that formed part of their residence. For, had they only
spent L20 then instead of L40, they could have repaid their hard-dealing
relative not only the smaller mortgage, but the "other debts," out of
the L40 they received for Snitterfield from the more liberal Robert
Webbe.

Finding John Lambert even harder to deal with than his father, John
Shakespeare brought a Bill of Complaint against him in the Court of
Queen's Bench,[115] 1589, by John Harborne, attorney, in which his wife
and son are mentioned. Nothing seems then to have been done. On November
24, 1597, backed by their son's influence and money, John and Mary
Shakespeare, plaintiffs, without associating their son's name, made a
formal complaint to the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Egerton,[116]
stating that Edmund Lambert was to hold it only until repaid the loan,
that the money had been duly tendered to him on the agreed date, that he
had refused it, and that his son John holds the land still, and makes
secret estates of the premises, the nature of which they cannot
describe, as the papers have been withheld them; that their papers and
evidences are open to the court. They add further that "the sayde John
Lamberte ys of greate wealthe and abilitie, and well frended and allied
amongst gentlemen and freeholders of the county ... and your saide
oratores are of small wealthe and very fewe frendes and alyance in the
said countie. They pray a writ of subpoena to be directed to John
Lambert to appear in the Court of Chancery."

John Lambert, pointing out the uncertainty and insufficiency of the
plaintiff's bill, also that the bill had _already been exhibited against
him_ in the same court, and he had fully answered it, asserts that the
arrangement was a deed of sale, with the conditional proviso that if
John Shakespeare should pay L40 on the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, 1580, to Edmund Lambert, in Barton-on-the-Heath, the bill of
sale should be void. He did not pay the money on the day, and therefore
his father was legally seized of the estate.

To this John and Mary Shakespeare replied, and again explained that the
money was tendered at the date, and that Edmund Lambert refused to
receive it unless other moneys also were paid, of which no condition had
been fixed; that on the death of Edmund, John had stepped into
possession, and refused to hear anything from them.[117] John Lambert
had another quibble, that John Shakespeare had exhibited two bills
against him, one in his own name, and one associating his wife's. On
July 5, 1598, July 10, 1598, and May 18, 1599, further steps were taken,
but still no decision was reached. Therefore, on June 27, 1599, a
commission was appointed to examine both parties. In the Index Trin.
Term, 41 Elizabeth, there is the entry "Shackspeere contra Lambert," but
the page that contained further notice is lost.

On October 23, 1599, another entry of the case is recorded: "Yf the
defendant show no cause for stay of publicacion by this day sevenight,
then publicacion ys granted"; but nothing more has come to us. Probably
delay helped the more powerful, certainly possession proved nine-tenths
of the law, and the expenses of legal action even then were
paralyzing.[118] It is strange that the fate of Asbies as a property is
unknown. There are traces of its being in the possession of Adam Edkins
in 1668, of one John Smith after him, and of Clement Edkins in
1699,[119] but the name seems to have vanished, and with it all
remembrance of the boundary of the inheritance of the Ardens of
Wilmcote.

       *       *       *       *       *

                     MARY ARDEN'S FAMILY.

                     Walter Arden, = Eleanor, 2nd dauther and coheiress
of Park Hall, 16th in descent from | of John Hampden of
 the Saxon Sheriff Ailwin. See his | Great Hampden, co. Bucks.
 tomb at Aston _juxta_ Birmingham. |
   |----------|-----------------------|--------|-------|--------|---------|------|
   |          |                       |        |       |        |         |      |
Sir John.     Thomas, = wife       Martin.  Robert.  Henry.  William.  Alicia.  Margaret.
              2nd son | unknown
             Of Aston |
             Cantlow; |
               bought |
             Snitter- |
           field 1501.|
                   Robert Arden = 1st wife unknown
                                | 2nd wife, Agnes Webbe,
                                | widow of W. Hill
    |---------------|-------------|------------|------------|----------|----------|
    |               |             |            |            |          |          |
1st dau.,       2nd dau.,     3rd dau.,    4th dau.,    5th dau.,  6th dau.,  7th dau.,
Agnes Arden,    Joan Arden,   Katharine    Margaret     Joyce      Alice      Mary
m. 1st, John    m. Edmund     Arden, m.    Arden, m.    Arden.     Arden.     Arden,
Hewyns:         Lambert, of   Thomas       1st,                               m. John
 |  |           Barton-on-    Edkins, of   Alexander                          Shake-
Thomas.         the-Heath     Wilmecote.   Webbe, of                          speare.
Margaret.          |             |         Snitterfield;                         |
2nd, Thomas     John Lam-     Thomas       2nd,                                  |
Stringer.          bert.       Edkins.     Edward                                |
 |  |  |                                   Cornwall                              |
Ellice.                                    (had a son,                           |
John Stringer.                             Robert                                |
Arden Stringer.                            Webbe, m.                             |
                                           Mary                                  |
                                           Perkes).                              |
                                                                                 |
  |------------|----------|------------|---------|---------|---------|-----------|
  |            |          |            |         |         |         |           |
Joan,      Margaret,   William      Gilbert,   Joan,     Anne,    Richard,    Edmund,
b. 1558;   b. 1562;  Shakespeare,   b. 1566;   b. 1569;  b. 1571; b. 1573;    b. 1580;
d. infant. d. infant.  the poet     d. 1611.   d. 1646.  d. 1579. d. 1612.    d. 1607.
                      b. April 23,   _s.p._                        _s.p._      _s.p._
                       1564; d.
                     April 23, 1616.

FOOTNOTES:

[83] See "Survey of Birmingham," 1553, Clement Throckmorton, p. 3,
edition by Mr. W. B. Bickley.

[84] Stratford Miscellaneous Records, No. 436.

[85] _Ibid._

[86] Halliwell Phillipps mentions Elizabeth Skerlett as an eighth,
surely in error.

[87] I believe that I have found the register of her death in
association with the Ardens of Park Hall, see p. 41.

[88] This supposition is strengthened by the language of the lease which
Mrs. Arden granted her brother of a farm in Snitterfield, May 21, 1560,
of which "estate was made to me the said Agnes by my late husband in the
fourth year of the raigne of the late King Ed. VI., 1550;... now in
tenure of Richard Shakespeare, John Henley, and John Hargrave."

[89] See Records of Stratford-on-Avon.

[90] _Ibid._

[91] Worcester Wills. Consistory Court.

[92] See Sir George Nichols' "History of the English Poor Law."

[93] See "Release from Thomas Stringer of Stockton, co. Salop, to
Alexander Webbe of Snitterfield, _husbandman_, 12th Feb., 11 Eliz.,
witness John Shaxpere," confirmed after the marriage of Margaret to
Edward Cornwall, October 16, 18 Elizabeth. "A transfer from John
Shakespeare and Mary his wife" of her shares of Snitterfield, 21 Eliz.,
for L4; 15 Oct., 22 Eliz., for L40; and 23 Eliz., 6s. 8d. "Release from
Thomas Stringer and Thomas Edkins to Robert Webbe, 23rd Dec., 21 Eliz."
"A grant from Edmund Lambert and Joane his wife to Robert Webbe of their
interest in Snitterfield, 2nd May, 23 Eliz." (Stratford-on-Avon
Records).

[94] Stratford-on-Avon Miscellaneous Papers.

[95] Chamberlain's Accounts, Stratford-on-Avon.

[96] Worcester Wills.

[97] Reply of John Lambert in 1597, Chancery Proceedings.

[98] Note of the fine (Halliwell-Phillipps' "Outlines," ii., 11 and
202).

[99] _Notes and Queries_, 8th Series, vol. v., pp. 127, 296, 498.

[100] West's "Symboleography Concords," pp. 10, 11.

[101] Halliwell-Phillipps, "Outlines," ii. 202. Wilmcote Fines, Hilary
term, 21 Eliz.

[102] Halliwell-Phillipps points out that it is for L4, which is an
evident error ("Outlines," ii. 179).

[103] _Ibid._, p. 179.

[104] "Sealed in the presence of Nycholas Knooles, Vicar of Auston."

[105] Halliwell-Phillipps, "Outlines," ii. 182. Dugdale, Alveston.

[106] _Ibid._, ii. 176.

[107] Warr. Fines. "In onere Georgii Digbie Armigeri Vicecomitis
comitatu praedicti de anno vicesimo tercio Regine Elizabethe, fines de
Banco anno vicesimo secundo Regine Elizabethe pro termino Pasche," etc.
"Recepta per me Johannem Cowper sub vice comitem."

[108] Halliwell-Phillipps, "Outlines," ii. 179.

[109] Stratford-on-Avon Miscellaneous Documents.

[110] _Ibid._

[111] Stratford Miscellaneous Papers.

[112] _Ibid._

[113] Court of Chancery Records.

[114] French, "Genealogica Shakespeareana," p. 484.

[115] Coram Rege Rolls, Term Mich., 31 and 32 Elizabeth; also
Halliwell-Phillipps, ii. 11.

[116] Chancery Cases, 40-41 Elizabeth, S.s. 24 (21), Stratford, P. R.
O.; also Halliwell-Phillipps, ii. 14.

[117] Chancery Papers, S.s. 24 (21), Stratford, _in dorso_, "40-41
Eliz."; Halliwell-Phillipps, ii. 204.

[118] _Notes and Queries_, 8th Series, v. 127, 296, 478.

[119] Halliwell-Phillipps, ii. 205.




CHAPTER VII

JOHN SHAKESPEARE


Richard Shakespeare was in tenure of the property at Snitterfield, which
Robert Arden settled on his wife and daughters July 17, 4 Edward VI.,
Adam Palmer and Hugh Porter being trustees. On November 26, 1557, he,
along with the executors of Robert Arden and Thomas Stringer, was
returned as indebted to the late Hugh Porter of Snitterfield. On
September 13 he prised the goods of Richard Maydes, and on June 1, 1560,
of Henry Cole, of Snitterfield. He is believed to have been the father
of John, Henry, and possibly of Thomas Shakespeare.

John Shakespeare must have come to Stratford-on-Avon, probably from
Snitterfield, some time before 1552, for in that year he is described as
a resident in Henley Street, and fined for a breach of the municipal
sanitary regulations, along with Humphrey Reynolds and Adrian Quyney,
twelvepence a piece.[120] This relatively large sum implies that he must
have been even then a _substantial_ householder. The determination of
the house he then dwelt in becomes interesting in its bearing on the
tradition as to the poet's birthplace. Nothing is recorded of John for
the next few years, but he seems to have prospered in business, trading
in farmers' produce. In a law-suit of 1556, with Thomas Siche of Arscot,
Worcester, he was styled a "glover." In that year he bought from George
Turner a freehold tenement in Greenhill Street, with garden and croft,
which is not mentioned in any of his later transactions, and from Edward
West a freehold tenement and garden in Henley Street, the eastern half
of the birthplace messuage. Each of these was held by the payment of
sixpence a year to the lord of the manor and suit of court. Whether he
had previously lived in this eastern tenement, or in the western half,
as a tenant has not been absolutely decided.

He was summoned on the Court of Record Jury this year, and was party to
several small suits, in all of which he was successful. In 1557 he was
elected ale-taster, and curiously enough he was amerced for not keeping
his gutters clean, in company with Francis Harbage, Chief Bailiff,
Adrian Quyney, Mr. Hall, and Mr. Clopton. He is believed to have married
Mary Arden in 1557. The registers of Aston Cantlow, where it is likely
that Mary was married, do not begin so early. She was single at the time
of her father's death in 1556, and on September 15, 1558, "Jone[121]
Shakespeare, daughter to John Shakespeare, was christened at Stratford
by Roger Divos, minister." In 1558 John Shakespeare was elected one of
the four Constables of the town,[122] and, in 1559, one of the affeerors
or officers appointed to determine the imposition of small arbitrary
fines. In 1561 he was elected one of the Chamberlains, as well as one of
the affeerors. He remained Chamberlain for two years, and apparently so
well did he discharge his financial duties in that office that he was
called on to assist later Chamberlains in making up their accounts. It
is generally supposed that he could not write, because in attesting
documents he made his mark. But I am not sure that this habit is a
certain sign of his ignorance of the art. Camden himself chose a _mark_
as a signature based on his horoscope. (See his letter to Ortelius,
Sept. 14, 1577.)

In 1561 Richard Shakespeare of Snitterfield died, and his goods were
administered by his son, "John Shakespeare, _Agricola_, of
Snitterfield," Feb. 10, 1561-62.[123] Many doubt that, even if he had
any interest in Richard's property, such a description would have been
given of the Chamberlain of Stratford-on-Avon. It must not be forgotten
that there had been a John Shakespeare presented and fined twelvepence
on October 1, 1561, in Snitterfield Court, but he may have been the
Stratford John. In the description of a neighbouring property in 1570,
we learn that there was a "John Shakespeare of Ingon," a farm in the
neighbourhood of Snitterfield; and John Shakespeare of Ingon was buried
September 25, 1589, according to Mr. Halliwell-Phillipps.[124] Hence
arose reasonable doubts of the identity of John of Stratford with John,
the heir of Richard Shakespeare of Snitterfield. Still, the evidence is
much stronger in support of his identity than against it.

On December 2, 1562, the Stratford baptismal register records the
christening of "Margaret, daughter of John Shakspere." At the making up
of the Chamberlain's accounts for 1562-63 in January, 1563-64, the
Chamber was found in debt to John Shakespeare 25s. 8d., as if he had
been the finance Chamberlain of the two. Both of his daughters were dead
when, on April 26, he christened his firstborn son William. That summer
the plague raged in Stratford; the Council meetings were held in the
garden, to avoid infection, and collections were made among the
burgesses for the relief of the poor, to each of which John Shakespeare
contributed.

In 1565 he was chosen alderman, and not only rendered the Chamberlain's
accounts, but seems to have borne their financial liabilities, as in the
accounts for the year is noted, "Item, payd to Shakspeyr for a rest of
old det L3, 2, 7-1/2," the sum which was really entered as a debt in
favour of the acting Chamberlains. The following year he again made up
the accounts for the Chamberlains, and the Chamber was found to be in
debt to him 6s. 8d., a sum that was not repaid until January, 1568.

From the number of petty actions for debt in which he appeared, either
as plaintiff or defendant, one would believe that the business men of
Stratford did not care to pay up until they were obliged to do so. In
1566 there occurs an interesting suit, which shows that John Shakespeare
was even then acquainted with the Hathaways. In two actions against
Richard Hathaway--one for L8, and one for L11--John Shakespeare had been
security, and his name was substituted in the later proceedings for that
of the defendant.

On October 13, 1566, his son Gilbert was christened.

In 1567 he was assessed on goods to the value of L4[125] for the subsidy
3s. 4d.; and in another entry on L3, 2s. 6d. This was not at all a small
entry for a tradesman of the time. Everyone tried to make his estimate
as small as possible, as men do to-day, when taxes depend on it. He was
nominated that year, though not elected, to the post of High Bailiff, to
which office, however, he was elected on September 4, 1568. In the
precepts that he issued he is styled "Justice of the peace and Bailiff
of the Town."[126] In the Chamberlain's accounts of January 26, 1568-69,
there is mentioned, "Item to Mr. Balyf that now is 14/-," a sum not
explained or accounted for; and in 1570 the Chamberlains "praye
allowance of money delivered to Mr. Shaxpere at sundry times L6," during
their year 1569-70, as if he had been doing work for the town.[127] On
April 15, 1569, another daughter Joan was christened; and on September
28, 1571, his daughter Anna. After his year of office, John Shakespeare
was always called "Master," a point to be remembered in determining the
meaning of various little records in a town where others of the name
came to reside. In 1571 he was elected Chief Alderman, and in 1572 he
attained what may really be considered as his chief honour. "At this
Hall yt is agreed by the asent and consent of the Aldermen and burgeses
aforesaid, that Mr. Adrian Queney now bailif and Mr. John Shakespeare,
shall at Hilary term next ensuing deale in the affairs concerninge the
commen wealthe of the Borroughe according to their discrecions." This
was an important consideration to devolve on the shoulders of a man if
he could not read or write, and it very probably involved a visit to
London.[128] In 1574, March 11, his son Richard was born; and in 1575 we
find the locality of his house in Henley Street determined by William
Wedgewood's sale, September 20, to Edward Willis for L44, of his two
tenements "betwyne the tenement of Richard Hornbee on the east part, and
the tenement of 'John Shakesper yeoman' on the weste part"--the street
on the south, and the waste ground called Gilpittes on the north. This
shows, therefore, that the east tenement of the birthplace was then in
his occupation, and that somehow he was entitled yeoman. But in October
he himself also bought two houses for L40 from Edmund and Emma Hall, the
locality not specified. One of these has been supposed by some to have
been the birthplace, or perhaps both, seeing that later entries make
John Shakespeare responsible to the lord of the manor for 13d. for his
western tenement, and the garden or toft to the west of it, as against
the 6d. due for his eastern tenement.

[Illustration: PRESENT VIEW OF SHAKESPEARE'S BIRTHPLACE.

_To face p. 55._]

We must then face the question, either John Shakespeare owned the
birthplace in 1552, and resided in it until he added the wool-shop in
1556; or he rented the wool-shop in 1552, which he purchased in 1556; or
he rented the birthplace in 1552, which he purchased in 1575 from the
Halls. Under whatever circumstances he secured these, both remained free
to him during all his financial difficulties, and descended to his son.
But these uncertainties create the doubt that remains in the mind of
some, _Was the poet really born in the birthplace which tradition has
assigned to him, or not?_ To me it seems that the balance of all
considerations remains in favour of the birthplace. It is hard to
account for a purchase in 1575 (that evidently galled him) of any other
premises save those in which he resided. Little is known of John
Shakespeare or his family during 1576 and 1577, but in 1578 begin the
records of his temporary poverty, which I have noted under the account
of his relations to his wife's relatives. For the Town Council,
doubtless in consideration of his past services, excused him paying 3s.
4d., as his share of "the furniture of the pikemen," etc.; and, along
with Mr. Robert Bratt (the poorest member of the Corporation), he was
excused the 4d. a week imposed on the aldermen for relief of the poor.
Then came the mortgage of Asbies in 1578-79.[129] The following year he
again left unpaid his share of the levy for armour--3s. 4d.; and he
began, probably through shamefacedness, not to show himself at the
Halls, though the State Papers still enter him among the gentlemen and
freeholders of Warwickshire. But another influence began to affect his
circumstances prejudicially about this time, and that is, the evil
fortunes of his brother Henry of Snitterfield. How his biographer, in
the "Dictionary of National Biography," could call this brother "_a
prosperous farmer_," I know not.

In 1574 there had been a free fight, wherein blood was drawn, between
him and Edward Cornwall, who afterwards became the second husband of his
brother's sister-in-law, Margaret Webbe, _nee_ Arden. In the year 1580
there was an extra long series of actions against him for debt; threats
of excommunication for withholding tithes; fines for refusing to wear
the statute caps on Sunday; fines for not doing suit of court.
Altogether he seems to have been a high-spirited fellow, who brought on
himself, through lack of prudence, much of his ill-luck, and who had the
unfortunate knack of involving other people in his troubles.

In 1582 both brothers were summoned as witnesses in support of Robert
Webbe against the Mayowe appeal.

In November of that year John's eldest son William, of whom no earlier
direct mention had been preserved, added to his embarrassments by a
premature marriage, and in the following year John was made a
grandfather by the birth of Susanna Shakespeare. In 1584 the twins
Hamnet and Judith were added to his anxieties. About this time the
Stratford Records notice how a John Shakespeare was worried by suits
brought against him by John Brown, in whose favour a writ of distraint
was issued against Shakespeare in 1586. But the answer was returned that
"he had nothing whereon to distrain."

There are several reasons for believing that this John was not the
poet's father. The prefix Mr. is not used in the entries; it is certain
that he retained his freeholds in Henley Street all his life, and if he
had "no goods whereon to distrain," he could hardly have been received
as sufficient bail at Coventry, on July 19 of that year, for Michael
Price, tinker, of Stratford-on-Avon, or as security for his brother
Henry's debts. In 1586 he was removed from his office of alderman.[130]

Just in the year of the death of Edmund Lambert, when the possession of
money would have given him power to have renewed his efforts to regain
Asbies, Henry Shakespeare became a defaulter, and Nicholas Lane, by
Thomas Trussell, his attorney, sued John Shakespeare in his place, 1587.
William Court was his attorney in a weary case, which must have led both
sides into heavy costs, over the recovery of L22.[131]

On September 1, 1588, he paid a visit to John Lambert at
Barton-on-the-Heath, in the vain hope of inducing him to surrender
Asbies; instituted proceedings against those who owed him money in
Stratford, and, in 1589, against Lambert in the Queen's Bench at London,
probably acting in the latter case through William. From the inquisition
post-mortem of the Earl of Warwick, in 1590, we know Mr. John
Shakespeare still owned the two houses in Henley Street.

In 1592 Mr. John Shakespeare appraised the goods of two important
neighbours--of Ralph Shawe, wool-driver, July 23, and Henry Field,
tanner, August 21. Thomas Trussell, the attorney, drew up the inventory,
and denominated his associate as Mr. John Shaksper, _Senior_, for no
clear reason, but possibly to distinguish him from the shoemaker John.
The attestation is witnessed only by a cross. During this year Sir
Thomas Lucy and others were drawing up the lists of Warwickshire
recusants[132] that had been "heretofore presented." Among these they
included several members of the sorely-oppressed family of the Ardens of
Park Hall, and in Stratford-on-Avon "Mr. John Shackspere" and eight
others. Probably some friendly clerk, wishing to spare them fines,
added: "it is sayd that these last nine coom not to Churche for feare of
process for debte." But it is quite possible it might refer to John
Shakespeare the shoemaker, who, having been Master of the Shoemakers'
Company, _might_ have been called "Mr."[133] In the earlier undated
draught from which this was taken the Commissioners state: "wee suspect
theese nyne persons next ensuinge absent themselves for feare of
processes, Mr. John Wheeler, John his son, Mr. John Shackespeere," etc.

Away up in London in 1593 the tide was beginning to turn for the family
through the efforts of the poet and the affection of the Earl of
Southampton.

In this year Richard Tyler sued a John Shakespeare for a debt, but it is
not at all certain it was not one of the others of the name. In a case
brought by Adrian Quyney and Thomas Barker against Philip Green,
chandler, Henry Rogers, butcher, and John Shaxspere, in 1595, for a debt
of L5, the absence of a trade after Shakespeare's name has made Mr.
Halliwell-Phillipps suppose that he had retired by this date. A John
Shakespeare attested by a cross the marriage settlement of Robert
Fulwood and Elizabeth Hill in 1596, which represents probably the name
of the poet's father. In 1597 he sold, to oblige his neighbour, George
Badger, a narrow strip of land at the western side of his Henley Street
garden, 1-1/2 feet in breadth, but 86 feet in length. For this he
received L2 10s., and his ground-rent was reduced from 13d. to 12d., the
odd penny becoming Badger's responsibility. He also sold a plat, 17 feet
square, in the garden, behind the wool-shop, to oblige his neighbour on
the other side, Edward Willis.

The application made for coat-armour, initiated in 1596, ostensibly by
John Shakespeare, but really by William Shakespeare, as well as the
Lambert case, dragged on through the later years of the century.

That he had not lost credit with his fellow-townsmen may be seen by
John's latest recorded piece of work.

Early in 1601 an action was brought by Sir Edward Greville[134] against
the Corporation respecting the toll-corn; and John Shakespeare, with
Adrian Quyney and others, assisted to draw up suggestions for the use of
the counsel for the defendants. On September 8 of that year the funeral
of the old burgess took place at Stratford-on-Avon, but there is no
trace now left of any sepulchral monument or memorial of any kind. No
will or inventory, or even inquisition post-mortem, has come down to us.

It is quite possible that the Henley Street houses were entailed upon
his eldest son, or that he may have bought up all rights during his
father's lifetime to such an extent that "inheritance" could hardly be
talked of. He seems to have indeed supported all the family, as there is
no trace[135] of any of them, except Edmund the player, engaging in any
trade or profession. Whether his mother resided in Henley Street or at
New Place is not clear. There is nothing further known of her save the
register of her burial: "September 9th, 1608, Mayry Shaxspere Wydowe."

No sepulchre or memorial of her has come down to our time. We only know
that somewhere in the consecrated ground by Stratford Church lies the
dust of John Shakespeare and Mary Arden, the parents of the poet.

[Illustration: SHAKESPEARE'S BIRTH-HOUSE BEFORE THE RESTORATION IN
1857.]

FOOTNOTES:

[120] Stratford-on-Avon Chamberlain's Accounts, April 29, 6 Edward VI.

[121] Stratford-on-Avon Baptismal Register.

[122] All these references are from the Chamberlain's Accounts, and
accounts of the Halls at Stratford-on-Avon. Those who have not had
access to them may refer to Halliwell-Phillipps's "Outlines," i. 29; ii.
179 _et seq._

[123] Worcester administration bonds, 1561. _Notes and Queries_, 8th
Series, xii. 413.

[124] This statement is, however, evidently erroneous.

[125] Roll for Stratford, Longridge MS.

[126] Stratford Borough Records.

[127] The first notice of municipal employment of players appears during
his year of office, the Queen's Company and that of the Earl of
Worcester having performed before the council. A case was tried at the
Warwick assizes, Easter, 11 Elizabeth, concerning the tithes of
Rowington, and John Shakespeare, of Stratford-on-Avon, was on the
jury.--Ryland's "Records of Rowington."

[128] See Chamberlain's accounts for "the expenses of Mr. Queeney in
London," also for the expenses of the dinner given to Sir Thomas Lucy
and others, at which Quiney and Shakespeare presided.

[129] In 1579 he buried his daughter Anne "with the pall and the great
bell." On May 3, 1580, his youngest child Edmund was christened.

[130] "At this halle William Smythe and Richard Court are chosen
Aldermen in the places of John Wheler and John Shaxspere, for that Mr.
Wheler doth desire to be put out of the company, and Mr. Shaxspere doth
not come to the Halles when they be warned, nor hath not done of long
tyme."--Borough Reports. It is noteworthy that he was never fined for
absenting himself as others were.

[131] Controlment Rolls, 29 Elizabeth, Stratford-on-Avon.

[132] State Papers, Domestic Series, Elizabeth. It may be noted that
there was no Mrs. Shakespeare among the recusants. Other wives were
noted, as Mrs. Wheeler.

[133] It remains a fact that John Shakespeare, shoemaker, is heard of no
more in Stratford-on-Avon, and shortly afterwards his house was tenanted
by another man.

[134] Stratford Corporation Records.

[135] Halliwell-Phillips is in error in stating that Gilbert was a
London haberdasher.




CHAPTER VIII

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE


William Shakespeare was thirty-seven when he became head of the family
in 1601. His previous life must have been a stirring one, though we know
only too little about it. Still, certain inferences may be soundly based
on known facts. He must have been educated at the Stratford Grammar
School, free to the sons of the burgesses, a high-class school for the
time. Its head-master had a salary then double that of the Master of
Eton. A taste for learning had certainly imbued William's spirit even in
early years, but he doubtless warmly shared in the difficulties of his
father's life, and knew the anxieties of debt, the oppression of the
strong hand--the "cares of bread," as Mazzini calls it--and the
sickening weariness of the law's uncertainty and delay. Most of his
relatives were farmers, and his actions show that he would gladly have
followed the same course of life, with the relaxation of field sports,
of course, if he could have attained his desire. But the genius within
him was to be welded by fiery trials, and he was driven on a course that
seemed at discord with his nature, and yet led to its own fulfilment. In
the enthusiasm of a first love, he married early, not, it must
emphatically be noted, over-early for the custom of the period, when the
means of support were assured, but over-early, as it would then have
been considered, solely from a financial standpoint. He had no assured
means of support. His hope of securing his inheritance of Asbies was
fading. He did not marry an heiress. Many vials of wrath have been
poured on the devoted head of Anne Hathaway by those who do not consider
all sides of the question. Harrowing pictures of the relations of young
Shakespeare and "his aged wife" are drawn, even by such writers as Dr.
Furnivall. Now, it is a well-known fact that almost all very young men
fancy girls older than themselves, and it is an artistic fact that a
woman under thirty does look younger, and not older, than a man of the
same age, if she has led a natural and simple life. It is much more than
likely that the well-grown, responsible eldest son of anxious John
Shakespeare looked quite as old as Anne Hathaway, seven years his
senior, especially if she was slight and fair and _delicate_, as there
is every reason to believe she was. And the masterful spirit marks its
own age when it goes forth to woo, and determines to win the first real
fancy of his life. It must not be forgotten, in association with the
situation, that Richard Hathaway of Shottery (for whom John Shakespeare
had stood surety in 1566) had made his will on September 1, 1581, and
died between that time and July 9, 1582, when it was proved, leaving his
daughter Agnes, or Anne, the small but very common marriage portion of
L6 13s. 4d. A break had come into her home life; doubtless she went off
to visit some friends, and the young lover felt he could not live
without his betrothed, and determined to clinch the matter.

Much unnecessarily unfavourable comment has been made on the peculiar
circumstances of the marriage. People forget the complexity of religious
and social customs of the time, the binding force of betrothals, the
oppression of Catholics. In Robert Arden's settlement of July 17, 1550,
he speaks of his daughter Agnes as the _wife_ of Thomas Stringer, though
she did not marry him until October 15, 1550.[136] The perplexity is
increased by the entry of the marriage license of a William Shakespeare
and Anne Whately of Templegrafton, the day previous to that of William
Shakespeare and Anne Hathaway of Stratford, November 28, 1582.[137] It
all seems possible to explain. Travelling was inconvenient on November
roads; Will set out for the license alone, as bridegrooms were often
wont to do, when they could afford the expense of a special license. He
might give his own name, and that of his intended wife, at a temporary
address. The clerk made an error in the spelling, which might have been
corrected; but meanwhile discovered that Shakespeare was under age, was
acting without his parents--that the bride was not in her own home, and
that no marriage settlement was in the air. No risk might be run by an
official in such a case; the license was stayed; sureties must be found
for a penalty in case of error. So poor Will would have to find, in
post-haste, the nearest friends he could find to trust him and his
story. And who so likely to ask as Fulk Sandells and John Richardson,
friends of the Hathaways--the one supervisor, and the other witness to
the will of Anne's father Richard? They might have been at Worcester
market with him.

They were both "good men" in the financial sense, and their bond for L40
was accepted at the Bishop of Worcester's Registry in support of the
assertion that there was no impediment against this marriage by ground
of consanguinity or pre-contract. If this were all right, and if the
bride's friends were willing, by which must have been intended her
mother and brothers, then the marriage might be solemnized. It was
clearly a question in which the woman's friends were the proper parties
to summon. The bond of John Shakespeare would not then have been good
for L40, and the would-be bridegroom had nothing of his own. The place
where they were married has not yet been discovered; it is quite
possible to have been at "a private mass," as was the case in another
marriage with a similar bond at the same registry.[138] But they were
married somehow, and William probably brought home his fatherless bride
to his father's house, and there her little portion of L6 13s. 4d. might
go the further. But a wife and a family of three children sorely
handicapped a penniless youth, not yet of age, bred to no trade, heir to
no fortune, whose father was himself in trouble.

The after-date gossip of wild courses, deer-stealing, and combats with
Sir Thomas Lucy, are, I think, quite unfounded on fact. I have discussed
this fully in my article in the _Athenaeum_[139] on "Sir Thomas Lucy,"
and in my chapter on "The Traditional Sir Thomas and the Real."[140] It
is much more than likely Shakespeare was concerned in the religious
turmoil of the times, was somewhat suspected, and was indignant at the
cruel treatment of Edward Arden, head of the house, the first victim of
the Royal Commission[141] in 1583.

Eventually he went to London, probably with introductions to many people
supposed to be able and willing to help him. There were both Ardens and
Shakespeares in London, and many Warwickshire men, and they thought that
some place might be found even for him, the landless, unapprenticed,
untrained son of a straitened father. But there were so many in a
similar case. It is evident he succeeded in nothing that he hoped or
wished for. His own works prove that. He was unable to act the
gentleman, but was determined to play the man. He may have dwelt with,
and certainly frequently visited, his old Stratford friend Richard
Field, the apprentice, son-in-law, and successor of Vautrollier, the
great printer. In his shop he learned not only much technical detail of
his art, but refreshed his education--or, rather, went through another
course, reading with a new inspiration and a kindled enthusiasm.

I have shown elsewhere how very much his mental development owed to
books published by Vautrollier and Field,[142] sole publishers of many
Latin works, including Ovid, of Puttenham's "Art of Poetrie," of
Plutarch's "Lives," and many another book whose spirit has been
transfused into Shakespeare's works. We know that he had tried his hand
at altering plays, at rewriting them, and making them popular; we know
that he had translated them upon the stage before 1592, because of
Greene's notice then published by Chettle, of "the upstart crow."[143]
And he probably had written some. But his first firm step on the
staircase of fame was taken in the publication of his "Venus and Adonis"
by his friend Richard Field in April, 1593, and his first grip of
success in his dedication thereof to the young Earl of Southampton. The
kindness of his patron between 1593 and 1594 had ripened his admiration
into love; and the dedication of the "Rape of Lucrece" in the latter
year placed the relations of the two men clearly before the world. A
careful study of the two dedications leads to the conviction that the
"Sonnets" could only have been addressed to the same[144] patron. A
study of the poems and sonnets together shows much of the character,
training, and culture of the author--love of nature, delight in open-air
exercise and in the chase, sympathy with the Renaissance culture, and a
moral standard of no common order.

In his first poem he shows how preoccupation preserves Adonis from
temptation; in the second how the spiritual chastity of Lucrece is
triumphant over evil. The one poem completes the conception of the
other, and both lead into the sonnets. In these the author explains much
of his thought and circumstance--

    "Alas, 'tis true, I have gone here and there,
    And made myself a motley to the view;
    Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
    Made old offences of affections new."

    "Oh, for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
    The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
    That doth not better for my life provide
    Than public means, which public manners breeds."[145]

Southampton did not only chide with Fortune, but took her place. Through
his stepfather, Sir Thomas Henneage, who had succeeded Sir Christopher
Hatton in 1589[146] as Vice-Chamberlain of the Royal Household, he was
able to assist the players, and Shakespeare is for the first time
recorded as having played twice before the Queen, at Greenwich on St.
Stephen's Day, December 26, 1594, and on Innocents' Day, December 28 of
the same year.[147] On the latter day at night, amid the turmoil of the
Gray's Inn revels, Shakespeare's play of the "Comedy of Errors" was
represented by his company, doubtless through the interest of the Earl
of Southampton, then a student at Gray's Inn. At his coming of age in
October, 1594, the young nobleman would be the better able to assist his
poet. Tradition has reported that he gave Shakespeare a large sum of
money, generally said to be L1,000.

[Illustration: THE GUILD CHAPEL, FROM THE SITE OF NEW PLACE.

_To face p. 67._]

However it was, the tide of Shakespeare's fortunes turned with his
introduction to the Earl of Southampton, and his exertions during the
remaining years of the century began to tell in financial returns. It is
significant that the first known use to which he put his money was the
application for the _coat of arms_. In that same year fortune gave him a
cruel buffet in the death of his only son.[148] Nevertheless, he went on
with his purchase of the largest house in his native town; so that, if
the bride of his youth had waited long for a home of her own, he did
what he could to make up for the delay by giving her the best he could
find.[149] That he was cautious in his investments was evident. He had
seen too much suffering through rashness in money affairs not to benefit
by the experience. Thereby he made clear his desire for the
rehabilitation of himself and family in the place where he was born. By
1598 we have irrefragable testimony to the position he had already
taken, alike in the world of letters as in the social life of Stratford.
In the autumn of that year appeared the perennial advertisement of
Meres, the Professor of Rhetoric at Oxford, Master of Arts of both
Universities, who ranks him among the first of his day, as an epic and
lyric poet, and as a writer of both tragedy and comedy. "As the soule of
Euphorbus was thought to live in Pythagoras, so the sweet wittie soul of
Ovid lives in mellifluous and honey-tongued Shakespeare.... As Plautus
and Seneca are accounted the best for Comedy and Tragedy among the
Latins, so Shakespeare ... among the English is the most excellent in
both kinds for the stage ... witness his 'Gentlemen of Verona,' his
'Errors,' his 'Love's Labour's Lost,' his 'Love's Labour Wonne,' his
'Midsummer Night's Dream,' and his 'Merchante of Venice'; for tragedy
his 'Richard II.,' 'Richard III.,' 'Henry IV.,' 'King John,' 'Titus
Andronicus,' and 'Romeo and Juliet.'"[150]

On the other hand, the Quiney correspondence shows the estimation in
which his fellow-townsmen held him--that he had money, that he wanted to
invest, and was already styled "master." He was considering the policy
of buying "an odd yard land or other" in Stratford, when Richard Quiney,
who was in the Metropolis, was urged by his brother-in-law, Abraham
Sturley, to induce Shakespeare to buy one of the tithe leases. "By the
friends he can make therefore, we think it a fair mark for him to shoot
at; it obtained, would advance him in deed, and would _do us much
good_." Richard Quiney was in the Metropolis at the end of 1598 on
affairs of the town, trying to secure the grant of a new charter, and
relief from subsidy; but either on his own account, or the affairs of
the town, he applied to Shakespeare for a loan. As there are no letters
of Shakespeare's extant, and this is the only one addressed to him, it
is worth noting very specially. It could hardly have been sent, as it
was found among the Corporation Records. Mr. Halliwell-Phillipps
suggests that Shakespeare may have called to see Quiney before the
letter was sent off, and given his reply verbally.

"Loveinge contreyman, I am bolde of yow, as of a ffrende, craveinge yowr
helpe with xxx^li uppon Mr. Bushells and my securytee, or Mr. Myttons
with me. Mr. Rosswell is nott come to London as yeate, and I have
especiall cawse. Yow shall ffrende me muche in helpeing me out of all
the debettes I owe in London, I thancke God, and muche quyet my mynde,
which wolde nott be indebeted. I am nowe towardes the Cowrte, in hope of
answer for the dispatch of my buysness. Yow shall nether loase creddytt
nor monney by me, the Lord wyllinge; and nowe butt persuade yourselfe
soe, as I hope, and you shall nott need to feare, butt, with all hartie
thanckefullness, I wyll holde my tyme, and content yowr ffrende, and yf
we bargaine farther, you shal be the paie-master yowrselfe. My tyme
biddes me hastene to an ende, and soe I comitt thys (to) yowr care, and
hope of yowr helpe. I feare I shall nott be backe thys night ffrom the
Cowrte. Haste. The Lorde be with yow and with us all, Amen. From the
Bell in Carter Lane the 25th October, 1598. Yowrs in all kyndeness Ryc.
Quyney.

"To my loveinge good frend and contreymann Mr. Wm. Shackespere deliver
thees."[151]

And Shakespeare then befriended the man whose son was to marry his
daughter. The reply seems to have been as prompt as satisfactory, for on
the very same day Quiney wrote to his brother-in-law Sturley, who
replied on November 4: "Your letter of the 25th of October came to my
hands, the last of the same at night per Greenway,[152] which imported
that our Countryman Mr. William Shakespeare would procure us money;
which I will like of, as I shall hear when and where and how; and I pray
let not go that occasion, if it may sort to any indifferent conditions."

It is evident that Shakespeare had at some time or other associated
himself with Burbage's company. Now, James Burbage, "was the first
builder of playhouses" who had planned in 1576, and in spite of evil
report and professional rivalry, of municipal and royal restrictions,
legal and other expenses, had successfully carried on "The Theatre" in
Finsbury Fields. In 1596 he had purchased the house in Blackfriars,
against the use of which as a theatre was sent up to the Privy Council a
petition, which Richard Field signed.[153] The Burbages let this house
for a time to a company of "children," but eventually resumed it for
their own use, and in it placed "men-players, which were Hemings,
Condell, Shakespeare," etc. On Burbage's death in 1597, there was a
dispute about "The Theater" lease, and his sons transferred the
materials to Southwark, and built the Globe in 1599. On the rearing of
the Globe at heavy cost, they joined to themselves "those deserving men
Shakespeare, Hemings, Condell, Philips and others, partners in the
Profits of what they call the House, but making the leases for
twenty-one years hath been the destruction of ourselves and others, for
they, dying at the expiration of three or four years of their lease, the
subsequent yeares became dissolved to strangers, as by marrying with
theire widdowes, and the like by their children." (See the papers
concerning the shares in the Globe, 1535: 1. Petition of Benfield,
Swanston and Pollard to the Lord Chamberlain Pembroke (April). 2. A
further petition. 3. The answer of Shank. 4. The answer of C. Burbage,
Winifred, his brother's widow, and William his son. 5. Pembroke's
judgment thereon (July 12). 6. Shanke's petition (August 7). 7.
Pembroke's final decision.)[154]

Burbage, Shakespeare, Condell, Hemings had been housekeepers with four
shares each. These originally died with the owner, but in later years
could be inherited. Shakespeare's income therefore arose from:

1. Possibly some small sum allowed him by Richard Field and the
publishers for various editions of his poems, as well as the liberality
of the Earl of Southampton on their account.

2. Direct payments by the proprietors for altering and writing plays.
Shares in their publication he never seems to have had.

3. His share as a player of the money taken at the doors.

4. His share as a partner in the house of the money taken in the
galleries, etc.

5. His share of royal largesse in performances before the Queen, or
similar gifts from noblemen.[155]

6. His share of performances in various performing tours.

And thence he acquired money enough to buy New Place; to appeal to the
heralds for his father's coat of arms, and to pay the costs; to contest
the Lamberts' claim through successive applications for Asbies; and to
buy land and tithe leases. The death of his only son Hamnet did not
deter him in his earnest efforts to regain social position, and to
restore the fortunes of his family. An almost exact parallel may be
found in the efforts and aims of Sir Walter Scott. But Shakespeare,
having borne the yoke in youth, had acquired the experience and prudence
necessary to steer himself past the dangers of speculation and the
rashness of exceeding his assured income, which proved fatal to the less
severely-trained novelist.

In May, 1602, he purchased from the Combes for L320 about 107 acres of
land near Stratford-on-Avon, of which, as he was not in the town, seisin
was granted to his brother Gilbert. On September 28, 1602, Walter Getley
transferred to him a cottage and garden situated in Chapel Lane,
opposite the lower gardens of New Place, quite possibly intended for the
use of his brothers. It appears from the roll that he did not appear at
the Manorial Court in person,[156] then held at Rowington, there being a
stipulation that the estate should remain in the hands of the lady of
the manor, the Countess of Warwick, until he appeared to complete the
transaction with the usual formalities. On completing these, he
surrendered the property to his own use for life, with remainder to his
two daughters, a settlement rearranged afterwards in his will. It is
mentioned as in his possession in a subsequent subsidy roll of the
town.[157]

The only time in which he touched politics and State affairs he was
unfortunate. There is no doubt he must have trembled at the time of the
Essex Conspiracy, not only for his friend Southampton's life, but even
for his own; for Philips, the manager of his company, was called before
the Privy Council to account for the performances of the obnoxious play
of "Richard II."

The danger passed. Probably the Privy Council thought it futile to
attack the "Puppets." Nevertheless, after fulfilling their engagements
they hastened from the Metropolis.[158] Some of his company went to play
in Scotland, as far north as Aberdeen.[159] I am inclined to think
Shakespeare went with them. The scenery in "Macbeth"[160] suggests vivid
visual impressions, and the favour of James VI. must have been secured
_before_ his accession to the throne of England, for almost the first
act the King did on his arrival at the Metropolis, May 7, 1603, was to
execute a series of Acts that practically gave his company a monopoly.

     "Pat. I., Jac. I., p. 2, m. 4. Pro Laurentio Fletcher et
     Willielmo Shakespeare et aliis.[161]

     "James by the grace of God, etc., to all Justices, Maiors,
     Sheriffs, Constables, Hedboroughs, and other our Officers
     and lovinge Subjects, Greetinge. Knowe ye that wee, of our
     Speciall Grace, _certeine knowledge_ and mere motion, have
     licensed and authorized, and by these presentes doe license
     and authorize theise our Servaunts, Laurence Fletcher,
     William Shakespeare, Richard Burbage, Augustyne Philippes,
     John Hemings, Henrie Condell, William Sly, Robert Armyn,
     Richard Cowly, and the rest of their Associates Freely to
     use and exercise the Arte and Facultie of playing Comedies,
     Tragedies, Histories, Enterludes, Morals, Pastoralls,
     Stage-plaies, and such others like as theie have alreadie
     studied or hereafter shall use or studie, as well for the
     Recreation of our loveinge Subjects as for our Solace and
     Pleasure, when wee shall thincke good to see them, during
     our pleasure; and the said Commedies, Tragedies, Histories,
     Enterludes, Moralls, Pastoralls, Stage-playes, and
     suchelike, to shewe and exercise publiquely to their best
     Commoditie, when the Infection of the Plague shall decrease,
     as well within theire nowe usuall House called the Globe
     within our Countie of Surrey, as also within anie Toune
     Halls or Moute Halls, or other convenient Places within the
     Liberties and Freedom of anie other Cittie, Universitie,
     Toune or Boroughe whatsoever, within our said Realmes and
     Dominions.

     "Willing and commanding you and everie of you, as you tender
     our Pleasure, not onelie to permit and suffer them herein,
     without anie your Letts, Hindrances, or Molestations, during
     our said Pleasure, but also to be aiding and assistinge to
     them if anie Wrong be to them offered, and to allow them
     such former Curtesies as hath been given to men of their
     Place and Qualitie; and also what further Favour you shall
     shewe to theise our Servaunts for our sake, Wee shall take
     Kindlie at your Handes. In witnesse whereof, etc.

     "Witnesse our selfe at Westminster the nynetenth Daye of
     Maye.

     "PER BREVE DE PRIVATO SIGILLO."

     [The privy seal for this issued on May 17.]

As James made more stringent the laws concerning "vagabonds," as he took
from the nobles the power of patronage of players, reserving it only for
the Royal Family, this passport gave enormous power to the players,
favoured by the King in Scotland.

Shakespeare's early patron, the Earl of Southampton, had been released
from the Tower on April 10, and had gone to meet his new Sovereign,
doubtless speaking a good word for the company of players. His later
patron, the Earl of Pembroke, was recalled to Court favour. The King
visited him in his royal progress August 30 and 31, 1603, and held his
Court at Wilton, Winchester,[162] and Basing during most of October,
November,[163] and December, during which time the players were summoned
on December 2. "To John Hemyngs on 3rd December, for a play before the
King, by the King's men at Wilton, and for coming from Mortlake in
Surrey, L30."[164]

On March 15, 1603-1604, the King's players were summoned to the
Triumphant Royal Procession, received robes for the occasion, and took
rank at Court[165] with the Grooms of the Chamber. Henceforth
Shakespeare's genius revelled in the opportunities fortune had made for
him, and in the taste he had himself educated. The world appreciated his
work the better "that so did take Eliza and our James."[166] The snarls
of envy witnessed his success; the eulogiums of admirers perpetuated his
appreciation. On May 4, 1605, Augustine Phillips died, leaving by will
"to my fellow William Shakespeare a thirty-shilling piece in gold." In
July of that year (July 24, 1605) Shakespeare completed his largest
purchase, in buying for L440 the unexpired term of the moiety of the
tithe-lease of Stratford, Old Stratford, Bishopton, and Welcombe.

In that year John Davenant took out the lease of the Crown Inn at
Oxford, where the following year his son William was born. Gossip,
supported, if not originated, by himself, suggests that William Davenant
was the son rather than the godson of Shakespeare, an unfounded slander
disposed of by Halliwell-Phillipps.

On June 5, 1607, Susanna Shakespeare married Dr. Hall. Elizabeth, their
only child, and the only grandchild Shakespeare saw, was born in
February, 1607-1608, and in September of that year John Shakespeare's
widow--Shakespeare's mother--died.

It is probable Shakespeare returned home to his mother's funeral, as he
was chief godfather on October 16 to the William Walker of Stratford to
whom he bequeathed 20s. in gold in 1616. In 1608 and 1609 Shakespeare
instituted a process for debt against John Addenbroke and his security
Hornebie. His attorney was his cousin, Thomas Greene, then residing,
under unknown conditions, at New Place. In the latter year he instituted
more important proceedings concerning the tithes. The papers of the
complaint by Lane, Green, and Shakespeare to Lord Ellesmere in 1612,
concerning other lessees, give details of the income he derived
therefrom.[167]

In 1610 he purchased 20 acres of pasture-land from the Combes to add to
his freeholds. The concord of the fine is dated April 13, 1610, and, as
it was acknowledged before the Commissioners, he is believed to have
been in Stratford at the time. In a subscription list drawn up at
Stratford September 11, 1611, his name is the only one entered on the
margin, as if it were a later insertion, "towards the charge of
prosecuting the Bill in Parliament for the better repair of Highways." A
Parliament was then expected to meet, but it was not summoned till long
afterwards. In 1612 Lane, Green, and Shakespeare filed a new bill of
complaint concerning the tithes before Lord Ellesmere.

In March, 1613, he made a curious purchase of a tenement and yard, one
or two hundred yards to the east of the Blackfriars Theatre. The lower
part had long been in use as a haberdasher's shop. The vendor was Henry
Walker, a musician, who had paid L100 for it in 1604, and who asked then
the price of L140. Shakespeare, however, at this raised price secured
it, leaving L60 of it on mortgage. The date of the conveyance deed is
March 10, 1613,[168] probably signed on the 11th, on which day it was
enrolled in the Court of Chancery. Besides the witnesses to this
document, there was present Henry Lawrence, the scrivener who had drawn
it up, who unfortunately lent his seal to the poet, which still exists,
bearing the initials "H. L."

Shakespeare is believed to have written two plays a year while he was a
shareholder. On June 29, 1613, the Globe Theatre was destroyed by fire
while the history of Henry VIII. was being enacted. Burbage, Hemings,
Condell, and the Fool were so long in leaving the theatre that the
spectators feared for their safety. It is not known whether this fire
would prove a loss to him. In June of that year a malicious piece of
gossip was circulating in Stratford against the good name of
Shakespeare's daughter, Susanna Hall. The rumour was traced to a man
called Lane, who was summoned to appear before the Ecclesiastical Court
at Worcester on July 15, 1613. He did not venture to appear, and he was
duly excommunicated for perjury.

It was the custom for the Corporation then to make complimentary
offerings of wine to those whom they wished to honour, and thus they
honoured an itinerant preacher, quartered at New Place, in the spring of
1614, with a quart of sack and another of claret, and this has been
supposed to prove that the poet had turned Puritan. John Combe, one of
the chief men of the neighbourhood, died in July, 1614, leaving
Shakespeare L5. Shakespeare would probably never receive it. The will,
dated January 28, 1612-13, was not proved till November, 1616. It is
clear, however, that these men were friendly at that time, and that the
mock elegy, attributed to Shakespeare, could not then have been written,
or, if written, was only laughed at. The Globe Theatre was rebuilt at
great cost that year. Chamberlain, writing to a lady in Venice, said: "I
hear much speech of this new playhouse, which is sayde to be the fayrest
that ever was in England" (June 30, 1614).

In the same year, William Combe, the new Squire of Welcombe, attempted
enclosure of some of the common fields, a design resisted by the
Corporation. This scheme materially affected Shakespeare through his
tithes, and much discussion has been waged over the true meaning of
the entries of his cousin, Thomas Green, the Town Clerk of
Stratford-on-Avon, and his attorney. Unfortunately, these are badly
written, and the composition is dubious; but to my mind it seems clear
that Green meant to say that Mr. Shakespeare could not bear the
enclosing of Welcombe.[169]

In the opening of 1615-16 Shakespeare found himself "in perfect healthe
and memorie--God be praised"; and yet, for some reason, he wished to
make a new will, "revoking all other wills," and his solicitor, Francis
Collins of Warwick, drew up a draft. Halliwell-Phillipps thinks this was
done in January, and that it was intended to have been signed on the
25th of that month. I own that the date, erased to be replaced by
"March," looks to me more like "February." An important difference it
would be, because in January he might not have known that his daughter,
Judith Shakespeare, aged 32, had made up her mind to marry Thomas
Quiney, aged 28. By February 25 she had already done it. On February 10,
1616, Thomas Quiney was married, at Stratford-on-Avon, to Judith
Shakespeare without a license, an irregularity for which both the
parties were summoned to appear[170] before the Ecclesiastical Courts
some weeks afterwards, and threatened with excommunication, but probably
the fact of Shakespeare's illness and death would act as an excuse in
high quarters.

Though it seems to me that the will must have been drawn up before
Judith's marriage, the possibility of such a change of state is clearly
considered. There is no sign of indignation at the later date of the
signing of the will, and L300 was a large portion; and there are no
alterations in his bequests to her, except a curious one. The first
bequest was originally intended to have been in favour of "_my sonne
and_ daughter Judith," but the "sonne" was erased. Of course, this
possibly arose from the scrivener intending to start with the Halls. But
the less important bequests came first. One hundred and fifty pounds was
to be paid to Judith within a year, in two instalments, the L100 in
discharge of her marriage portion, and the L50 on her surrendering her
share in the copyhold tenement in Stratford-on-Avon (once Getley's) to
her sister, Susanna Hall. Another L150[171] was to be paid Judith, or
any of her heirs alive at the date of three years after the testator's
death. If she had died without issue at that date, L100 thereof was to
go to Elizabeth Hall, and L50 to his sister Joan and her children. If
Judith were alive, the stock was to be invested by the executors, and
only the interest paid her as long as she was married, unless her
husband had "assured her in lands answerable to her portion."

Sister Joan was to have L20, the testator's wearing apparel, and a
life-rent in the Henley Street house, under the yearly payment of one
shilling. Five pounds a piece were left to her sons. Elizabeth Hall was
to have all the plate, except his broad silver-gilt bowl, which he left
to Judith. Ten pounds he left to the poor, his sword to Mr. Thomas
Combe, L5 to Thomas Russell, L13 6s. 8d. to Francis Collins. Rings of
the value of 26s. 8d. each were left to Hamnet Sadler, William Reynolds,
gent., Antony Marsh, gent., Mr. John Marsh; and in interpolation "to my
fellows, John Heming, Richard Burbage, and Henry Condell," and to
William Walker, his godson, 20s. in gold.

To enable his daughter Susanna to perform all this, she received "the
Capital Messuage called New Place, wherein I now dwell, two messuages in
Henley Street, and all my Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Lands,
Tenements and hereditaments whatsoever lying in Stratford-upon-Avon, Old
Stratford, Bishopton, and Welcombe, in the County of Warwick"; and "that
Messuage in Blackfriars in London near the Wardrobe wherein one John
Robinson now dwelleth."

The descent was to be to her sons if she had any, failing whom to the
sons of his grand-daughter Elizabeth, failing whom to the sons of his
daughter Judith, failing whom "to the right heires of me William
Shakespeare for ever."

Item interpolated: "I give unto my wife my second-best bed, with the
furniture."

Everything else to his "sonne-in-law John Hall, gent., and to his
daughter Susanna, his wife," whom he made executors.

Thomas Russell, Esq., and Francis Collins, gent., were to be overseers.
There were several witnesses. It was proved June 22, 1616, by John Hall,
at Westminster, but the inventory is unfortunately lost.

Much discussion has taken place over Shakespeare's legacy to his wife.
It may very simply and naturally have arisen from some conversation in
which a reference had been made to giving her "the best bed." But that
was the visitor's couch. "The second-best" would have been her own, that
which she had used through the years, and he wished her to feel that
that was not included in the "residue." That was to be her very own. As
to any provision for her, it must have taken the form of a settlement, a
jointure, or a dower. There is no trace of the first or second. But the
English law then assured a widow in a third of her husband's property
for life and the use of the capital messuage, if another was not
provided her. The absence of all special provision for Mrs. Shakespeare
seems to have arisen from her husband's knowledge of this and his trust
in the honour of Mr. John Hall, and the love of his daughters for their
mother. It also supports my opinion of her extreme delicacy of
constitution. She was not to be overweighted by mournful
responsibilities.

The indefiniteness of the residuary inheritance leaves room for surmise.
A curious reference, not, it seems to me, hitherto sufficiently noted,
occurs in the Burbage Case of 1635. Cuthbert, Winifred, the widow of
Richard, and William his son, recite facts concerning their father
James, who was the first builder of playhouses. "And to ourselves we
joined those deserving men, _Shakspere_, Hemings, Condell, Phillips, and
others, _partners[172] in the profittes of that they call the House_;
but _makeing the leases for twenty-one yeares hath been the destruction
of ourselves and others_, for _they dying at the expiration of three or
four yeares of their lease, the subsequent yeeres became dissolved to
strangers, as by marrying with their widdowes and the like by their
children_."

If Shakespeare's "lease" had not then expired, which seems to me
implied, it would have been "dissolved to a stranger" in the person of
Dr. Hall.

Some ready money would be required for the carrying out of the will.
Three hundred pounds left to Judith, and L73 13s. 4d. in smaller
bequests, would certainly run up to L400 by the payment of debts and
funeral expenses. The eagerness to leave all land to his own children is
another proof of Shakespeare's earnest desire to found a family.

Shakespeare did not immediately die after the signing of his will.
Probably the devoted care of his wife and daughters and the skill of his
son-in-law soothed his dying moments. But one cannot but have a lurking
suspicion of maltreatment through the crude medical notions of the time:
of bleeding when there should have been feeding; of vile medicines when
Nature should have been supported and not undermined by art. At all
events, Dr. John Hall had not the happiness and honour to record the
name of his illustrious father-in-law in his book of "Cures."[173] This
was the one great failure of his life.

[Illustration: THE CHANCEL, TRINITY CHURCH.

_To face p. 83._]

The April 23 on which Shakespeare closed his eyes completed his cycle of
fifty-two years, according to ordinary reckoning. But strangely enough
there is entered on his tombstone "AEtatis 53," and this suggests that he
had been born on April 22. No records of his funeral have come down to
us, but it must have made a stir in his native place. He was a native of
the town, known to all in his youth, and loved by many. Yet, on the
other hand, he had offended all the traditions of the borough. He had
descended from the safe levels of trade to the vagabond life of a
"common player," especially detested in Stratford-on-Avon (see notes);
he had made money somehow in the city, and had returned to spend it in
his native town, but he had never taken office, and had never been "one
of them." And at the end he was to be buried in the Chancel, the select
spot for nobles and prelates and "great men." Verily the tongues of the
gossips of Stratford would wag on April 25, 1616. The authorship of the
doggerel lines on his tomb has been attributed to various people.
Probably they were a part of the stock-in-trade of the stone-cutter,
that satisfied Shakespeare's widow as expressing a known wish of her
"dear departed." Rude as they are, they have fulfilled their end:

    "Good Frend, for Jesus' sake forbeare
    To digg the dust encloased here;
    Bleste be the man that spares thes stones,
    And curst be he that moves my bones."

Meanwhile Shakespeare's friends had been planning a monument to be
placed on the northern wall of the Chancel. The bust is said to have
been prepared from a death-mask, and to have been sculptured by one
Gerard Johnson, son and successor of the Amsterdam tomb-maker, whose
place of business lay between St. Saviour's Church and the Globe
Theatre. He may be presumed to have frequently seen Shakespeare in his
lifetime. The exact date of its erection is not known, but it would seem
to have been some time before 1623, as Leonard Digges refers to it in
his poem prefixed to the First Folio, "To the Memorie of the deceased
Authour, Maister W. Shakespeare":

    "Shakespeare, at length thy pious fellowes give
    The World thy Workes--thy Workes, by which outlive
    Thy touche thy name must; when that stone is rent,
    And Time dissolves thy Stratford monument,
    Here we alive shall view thee still."

Crude and inartistic as it is, the bust must have had some likeness in
its earlier days to have satisfied critical eyes; but it has passed
through so many vicissitudes, and suffered so much restoration, that the
likeness may have entirely vanished by this time. Nevertheless, it
remains a witness to the affection of the surviving, and a witness,
Puritans though they were, that it was on account of the power of _his
pen_ that he deserved special remembrance.

Upon a mural tablet are other verses, which would seem not to have been
composed by his own friends, as they speak of Shakespeare's lying
"within this monument." Whoever wrote them, the family accepted them,
and the world has endorsed them:

[Illustration]

William Camden had finished his "Britannia" by 1617 (commenced in 1597),
printed in 1625. He says of Stratford Church: "In the chancel lies
William Shakespeare, a native of this place, who has given ample proof
of his genius and great abilities in the forty-eight plays he has left
behind him."

It is evident that the First Folio, 1623, was _intended_ by his
"fellows" at the Globe to stand as their monument to his memory, built
of the plays that had become their private property by purchase. The
verses that preface it, written by W. Basse, suggest that Shakespeare
should have been buried by Chaucer, Spenser, Beaumont, in the Poets'
Corner of Westminster Abbey. But the author withdraws his wish.

    "Sleep, Brave Tragedian, Shakspere, sleep alone
    Thy unmolested rest, unshared cave
    Possess as Lord, not tenant to thy grave," etc.

Archy's "Banquet of Jests," printed in 1630, tells of one travelling
through Stratford, "a town most remarkable for the birth of famous
William Shakespeare." In the same year is said to have been written
Milton's memorable epitaph (printed 1632), a noble testimony from the
Puritan genius to the power of his play-acting brother:

    "What needs my Shakspere for his honoured bones,
    The labour of an age in piled stones?
    Or that his hallowed reliques should be hid
    Under a star y-pointing pyramid?
    Dear son of memory, great heir of fame,
    What needst thou such weak witness of thy fame?
    Thou, in our wonder and astonishment,
    Hast built thyself a live-long monument," etc.

By 1651 had already been suggested an annual commemoration of his life
in Samuel Sheppard's "Epigram on Shakspere," verse 6:

    "Where thy honoured bones do lie,
      As Statius once to Maro's urn,
    Thither every year will I
      Slowly tread and sadly turn."

The State Papers even show the appreciation of his age.[174] But I was
pleased to find that the first recorded _student_ of Shakespeare was a
woman. On January 21, 1638,[175] Madam Anne Merrick, in the country,
wrote to a friend in London that she could not come to town, but "must
content herself with the study of Shakespeare and the 'History of
Women,'" which seem to have constituted all her country library. The
Judges of King Charles I. reproached him with the _study_ of
Shakespeare's Plays.[176]

These records also contain a bookseller's (Mr. Moseley's) account[177]
for books, probably provided to Lord Conway, among which are "Ben
Jonson's poems, 6d., Beaumont's poems, 6d., Shakespeare's poems, 1/-,"
etc.

Other references to Shakespeare's works occur in the same records. But
as this is not intended as a literary biography, I forbear to reproduce
them now.

FOOTNOTES:

[136] Bearley Registers.

[137] Worcester Marriage Licenses.

[138] Francis Throgmorton, son and heir of Sir John Throgmorton, of
Feckenham, to Anne Sutton, alias Dudley, daughter of Sir Edward Sutton,
June 3, 1571. See my "Shakespeare's Warwickshire Contemporaries," p.
111.

[139] See July 13, 1895, p. 67.

[140] "Shakespeare's Warwickshire Contemporaries," ii., p. 12. Sir
Thomas had no park, and Justice Shallow bore no resemblance to him, etc.

[141] _Ibid._, vi., p. 48; also _Athenaeum_, February 8, 1896, p. 190.

[142] "Shakespeare's Warwickshire Contemporaries," i. Richard Field,
Stratford-on-Avon Press.

[143] Greene's "Groatsworth of Wit."

[144] See my articles "The Date of the Sonnets," _Athenaeum_, March 19
and 26, 1898, pp. 374, 403, and "Mr. W. H.," August 4, 1900, p. 154.

[145] Sonnets CX. and CXI.

[146] See my English article (reprinted) "The Earliest Official Record
of Shakespeare's Name," "Shakespeare Jahrbuch," vol. xxxii., Berlin,
1896.

[147] Declared Accounts, Treasury Chamber, Pipe Office, 542.

[148] August 11, 1596 (Stratford Burial Register).

[149] William Underhill, the Lord of Idlicote (by Barton-on-the-Heath),
conveyed New Place to Shakespeare at Easter, 1597, and died in July of
that year. His son Fulke died without issue, and his brother Hercules,
who succeeded, being under age, did not complete the transfer till 1602.

[150] Meres' "Wit's Treasury," second part of "Wit's Commonwealth."

[151] From the original at the birthplace, Stratford-on-Avon.

[152] Greenway was the Stratford carrier.

[153] State Papers, Dom. Ser., Eliz., cclx. 116.

[154] The Burbage and Benfield Case, the Lord Chamberlain's Papers,
1635, P.R.O. See also Halliwell-Phillipps, "Outlines," i. 312, and
Fleay, "Hist. of Stage," p. 325.

[155] See Accounts of Treasurer of the Chamber, etc.

[156] Halliwell-Phillipps, "Outlines," i. 205; ii. 19. Court Rolls of
Rowington.

[157] State Papers, Dom. Ser., Eliz., Subsidy List., 1605.

[158] The title-page of "Hamlet" (Stat. Reg., July 26, 1602) implies
that the company had been travelling to Oxford and Cambridge.

[159] See Dibden's "History of the Edinburgh Stage."

[160] See my own paper on "The Scottish and English
Macbeth."--"Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature," 1897.

[161] Rymer's "Foedera," V. xvi. 505.

[162] Nichols's "Progresses of James I.," vol. i.

[163] See Letters and Proclamations in State Papers, Domestic Series, of
the time.

[164] Dec. Acc. Treasurer of the Chamber (November, 1603-4).

[165] Halliwell-Phillipps, "Outlines," i. 212.

[166] Ben Jonson's verses, 1623, folio.

[167] Fleay's "Life of Shakespeare," p. 7.

[168] This deed is preserved in the Guildhall Library, and an account of
it appears in the _Antiquary_, New Series, iv. 204.

[169] See Dr. Ingleby, "Shakespeare and the Welcombe Enclosures."

[170] Worcester Bishops' Books.

[171] Justice Shallow tells Anne Page that his cousin Slender will
maintain her as a gentlewoman: "He will make you a hundred and fifty
pounds jointure."--_The Merry Wives of Windsor_, III., 4.

[172] See Halliwell-Phillipps, "Outlines," i. 312.

[173] See next chapter, p. 98.

[174] See Dr. Ingleby's "Century of Praise," and my own
"Bacon-Shakespeare Question Answered."

[175] State Papers, Domestic Series, Charles I., 409 (167).

[176] J. Cooke's appeal to all rational men, 1649.

[177] _Ibid._, 478 (16).




CHAPTER IX

SHAKESPEARE'S DESCENDANTS


William Shakespeare married Anne Hathaway, of a respectable family,
supposed to be of Shottery. He had three children: Susanna, and Hamnet
and Judith, twins. The boy died young, in 1596, _before_ the grant of
arms was completed. Anne Hathaway is described as of Stratford in the
marriage bond, but so were Fulk Sandells and John Richardson, the
bondsmen, known to be of Shottery. Indeed, the village lay within the
parish of Stratford.

Gwillim mentions arms,[178] "Sable, a bugle, or hunter's horn, garnished
and furnished argent. This coat-armour is of very ancient erection in
the church of Rewardine, in the Forest of Dean in Gloucestershire, and
pertained to the family of Hatheway of the same place." Again he says,
"Paleways of six, Argent and sable, on a bend Or, three pheons[179] of
the second, by the name of Hatheway."[180]

The Hathaways from whom Anne Shakespeare descended have not been proved
to be of the Gloucestershire stock, nor is it absolutely certain to
which of the three Shottery families she belonged. In the Warwickshire
Survey (Philip and Mary) it is stated that John Hathaway held part of a
property at Shottery, called Hewlands, by copy of Court Roll dated April
20, 1542. He was possibly the same as the archer of that name, mentioned
in the Muster Roll 28 Henry VIII., and was probably father of the
Richard befriended by John Shakespeare in 1566. The Stratford registers
record the birth of Thomas, son of Richard Hathaway, April 12, 1569;
John, February 3, 1574, and William, November 30, 1578. Anne Hathaway,
we know, from the words on her tombstone, must have been born before the
register commenced (1558). There is not another Agnes, or Anne, recorded
that could represent the legatee of Richard Hathaway's will of
September, 1581. To his eldest son, Bartholomew, he left the farm,[181]
to be carried on with his mother; to his second and third sons, Thomas
and John, he left L6 13s. 4d. each; to his fourth son, William, L10; to
his daughters, Agnes (or Anne) and Catherine, L6 13s. 4d., to be paid on
the day of their marriage; and to his youngest daughter, Margaret, L6
13s. 4d. when she was seventeen. Witnessed by Sir William Gilbert, clerk
and curate of Stratford.

The farm was not a freehold; Bartholomew did not become its owner until
1610, when he purchased it from William Whitmore and John Randall.
Richard Hathaway mentions in his will his "shepherd, Thomas Whittington
of Shottery." This man died in 1601, and by his will bequeathed to the
poor "Forty shillings that is in the hand of Anne Shaxspere, wife unto
Mr. Wyllyam Shaxspere, and is debt due to me." It was a common custom of
the days before savings-banks, for poor earners to deposit their savings
in the charge of rich and trustworthy friends, and this little link
seems to associate Anne Shakespeare doubly with that particular family
of Hathaways.

[Illustration: ANNE HATHAWAY'S COTTAGE.

_To face p. 88._]

Shakespeare does not mention any of his wife's relatives in his will,
but that does not necessarily imply coldness of feeling. Dr. John Hall,
his son-in-law, was made overseer of Bartholomew Hathaway's will in
1621, and in 1625 he was one of the trustees at the marriage of Isabel,
his granddaughter, the daughter of Richard Hathaway of Bridge Street. A
Richard is mentioned in the registers as being baptized in 1559 (but it
is not clear that he was the son of this Richard or of Bartholomew), who
became a baker in Bridge Street, an important member of the Town
Council, and Constable in 1605. He was elected High Bailiff of Stratford
in 1526, and was styled "gent." Many of the name are buried in Trinity
Church, Stratford.

In the rather remarkable testament of Thomas Nash,[182] first husband of
Shakespeare's only granddaughter, Elizabeth, he left L50 to Elizabeth
Hathaway, L50 to Thomas Hathaway, and L10 to Judith Hathaway. His wife
also remembered them, as will be afterwards shown. William Hathaway, of
Weston-upon-Avon, in the county of Gloucester, yeoman, and Thomas
Hathaway, of Stratford-upon-Avon, joiner, were parties to the New Place
settlement of 1647.

All this shows that the Shakespeares were not ashamed of their mother's
relatives. We do not know anything about Anne Shakespeare after her
husband's death until we reach the record of her own, "August 8th, 1623,
Mrs. Shakespeare."[183]

Tradition says that she earnestly desired to be buried in her husband's
grave. The survivors were not able to secure this, but they buried her
as near him as they could. Her daughter Susanna's grief is recorded in
touching lines, probably Latinized by Dr. Hall, placed on her tombstone:

[Illustration]

     "Thou, my mother, gave me life, thy breast and milk; alas!
     for such great bounty to me I shall give thee a tomb. How
     much rather I would entreat the good angel to move the
     stone, so that thy figure might come forth, as did the body
     of Christ; but my prayers avail nothing. Come quickly, O
     Christ; so that my mother, closed in the tomb, may rise
     again and seek the stars."[184]

Of Anne Shakespeare's children we have already spoken. Susannah was born
May 26, 1583, Hamnet and Judith, February 2, 1584-85. Hamnet--surely the
model of Shakespeare's sweet boys--had died on August 11, 1596. So the
name Shakespeare had glorified was doomed to die with himself, and was
not to be borne by lesser men. His property the poet could and did
devise.

Much discussion has taken place concerning the poet's views of his
younger daughter and her marriage. I do not think these views at all
supported by his will. Three hundred pounds was a very large portion
indeed at the time. It was demised to her doubtless before her marriage,
but it was not altered in relation to her after her marriage. It would
be hard indeed to believe that such a ceremony, even without a license,
could be performed in the gossipy town of Stratford without the news of
it somehow reaching the father's ears, if there had been any attempt
really to deceive. There is no reason to imagine Shakespeare disapproved
of the alliance. The young man came of an old Stratford family. It is
possible, however, that the poet foresaw a certain degree of instability
of character in the youth, and therefore wished to make his will act as
a marriage settlement that would secure his daughter from starvation.
The second half of his bequest might only be touched by her husband, if
he had settled on her land of equal value. This Thomas Quiney does not
seem to have done.

Richard Quiney had died 1601-2, and his widow Elizabeth kept a tavern,
in which she was probably at one time assisted by her younger son
Thomas. In December, 1611, she conveyed a house to William Mountford for
L131, and Judith Shakespeare was a subscribing witness. But neither she
nor her future mother-in-law signed their names, nor even the customary
cross, but a strangely-penned device of their own. Thomas Quiney lived
in a small house in the High Street until after his marriage. It was
probably his wife's money that enabled him to lease the larger house on
the other side, called "The Cage," and to start therein business as a
vintner.

At first he was successful. He was made a burgess in 1617, and was
Chamberlain from 1621 to 1623. His accounts for the latter year are
headed by a French proverb, as to the happiness of those who become wise
through the experience of others, that might have had an opposite
meaning to his contemporaries. It shows us that he could not only read
and write English, but at least a little French. By 1630 he was involved
in lawsuits, left the town council, and tried to dispose of the lease of
his house. In 1633 Dr. Hall and Thomas Nash acted as trustees for his
estate. His fortunes seemed to have become worse and worse. In 1652 he
went to the Metropolis, where his elder brother Richard was a thriving
grocer in Bucklersbury, in company with Roger Sadler. Richard, in
August, 1655,[185] made a will, in which he left, besides handsome
provision for his children--Richard, Adrian, Thomas, William and
Sarah--his brother Thomas L12 a year for life, and L5 for the expenses
of his funeral, out of his messuages at Shottery. The Quiney coat of
arms is entered among those of the London burgesses at Guildhall,[186]
"Mr. Quiney of ye Red Lyon in Bucklersbury."

The family of Thomas Quiney and his wife Judith was not a large one. In
the year that the poet died they christened their eldest son, "Shaksper,
filius Thomas Quyny gent.," November 23, 1616. But the child died in a
few months. On May 8, 1617, was buried "Shakespere, filius Thomas Quyny,
gent."

On February 9, 1617-18, "Richard filius Thomas Quinee" was baptized, and
on January 23, 1619-20, "Thomas, filius Thomas Queeny." These lads may
have followed to the grave their grandmother, Mrs. Shakespeare, and
their uncle, Dr. Hall; and they may have been present at the marriage of
their cousin, Mrs. Elizabeth Hall, to Mr. Thomas Nash. But they died
within a month of each other, probably of some infectious fever, the
younger first--"Thomas filius Thomae Quiney, Jan. 28th, 1638-9";
"Richardus filius Tho. Quiney, Feb. 26th, 1638-9." There were no other
children, and no prospect of more, and these early deaths affected the
devolution of the poet's property, as may hereafter be seen.

Unfortunately, we know nothing concerning Dr. John Hall before his
marriage to the poet's elder daughter Susanna on June 5, 1607, he being
then thirty-two and she twenty-five. He cannot have been the son of Dr.
John Hall, of Maidstone, Kent, whose translation of Lanfranc's
"Chirurgerie," with portrait of the translator, appeared in 1565. He
would have been an eminently suitable father, distinguished alike in his
art and his character, author of "The Court of Virtue," and many
metrical Bible translations; but he died in 1566, and the Stratford Dr.
John Hall was born in 1575. Halliwell-Phillipps[187] suggests that he
may have been connected with the Halls of Acton, Middlesex, because he
left his only daughter his "house and meadow at Acton." A John Hall was
married in that parish, it is true, on September 19, 1574,[188] to
Margaret Archer. But he had a daughter Elizabeth christened on June 5,
1575, about the very date at which the Stratford "John" must have been
born. Any connection, therefore, must have been further off than filial,
and the name is too common to be easily followed.

There were Halls in Worcester,[189] in Rowington, and in Coventry, and
it may be remembered that a John Hall supplanted Richard Shakespeare as
Bailiff of the Priory of Wroxall during the last year of its existence.
There was a Richard Hall of Stratford in the list of the gentry 12 Henry
VI., 1433. There was also a Richard Hall, gentleman,[190] of Idlicote,
in the sixteenth century, who seems to have moved about a good deal, as
there is a record of "Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Hall, Generosus,
bapt. February 14th, 1560," at Idlicote, and of "Maria filia Richardi
Hall, Generosus, March 17th, 1561," in Stratford. I have not traced any
of the name of John christened in Idlicote or elsewhere at the date.

The Idlicote Halls were suspected recusants, as may be proved by the
search made in their house when Edward Arden was dragged away from Park
Hall in 1583.[191] There was a "Mr. Hall" Alderman of Stratford 1558,
and in 1575 Edmund Hall and Emma his wife sold two messuages to John
Shakespeare. Were they contemplating going abroad at the time? They are
not further referred to in Stratford records. In a manuscript of the
British Museum a table is sketched of the Halls of Henwick in Hallow.
John Hall of Henwick had a son Thomas, who married, first, Anne,
daughter of William Staple, and, second, a daughter of Hardwick. He had
at least two sons, John, who married Margaret, daughter of William
Grovelight, of London, and Edmund, who married Emma, daughter of
----(?). John had Edward, Anne, Elizabeth, and Emma, and the descendants
of Edmund are not entered.[192] Catholicism might have been a reason for
realizing their property and going abroad.

Now, John Hall expressly calls himself a Master of Arts, though his name
is not recorded in the Books of the English Universities. He would not
have done so had he not taken his degree. It possibly might have been in
Paris, and he might have followed it up with foreign study. This would
quite accord with his appearance in Stratford after the death of
Elizabeth. A Warwickshire gentle origin[193] may somewhat account for
the degree of intimacy he seems to have had with the county families,
both Puritan and Catholic. His fame as a physician rapidly spread. He
resided in a house in Old Town, on the way from the church to the
chapel. His only daughter, Elizabeth, was baptized at Stratford on
February 21, 1607-8,[194] during her grandfather's (William
Shakespeare's) life. His name occurs in the town records in 1611,[195]
among the supporters to a Highway Bill, and he leased from the
Corporation a small stretch of wooded land on the outskirts of the town
in 1612. He must have remained on friendly terms with his father-in-law,
as he and his wife Susanna were left residuary legatees and executors of
Shakespeare's will, which he proved in June of that year, in the
Archbishop of Canterbury's Registry at London.

He shortly afterwards moved to New Place, beside his mother-in-law,
where the vestry notes of February 3, 1617-1618, record him as resident.
He was elected a Burgess of Stratford in 1617, and again in 1623, but
was excused from taking office on account of his professional
engagements. On April 22, 1626, Mr. Thomas Nash married his daughter,
Mrs. Elizabeth Hall. Hall gave the church a costly new pulpit, and in
1628 was appointed a borough churchwarden, in 1629 a sidesman, and in
1632 was compelled to become a burgess, and was soon after fined for
non-attendance at the council meetings.

In 1633 he was made the Vicar's churchwarden, and in that year the
Vicar, Thomas Wilson, induced him to join in a Chancery action against
the town. He was already in trouble with his fellow councillors, who in
October of that year expelled him for his "breach of orders, sundry
other misdemeanours, and for his continual disturbance at our Halles."
Evidently Dr. John had opinions of his own, and had the courage to
express them. He was a deeply religious man, and, though he has been
supposed to have shown Puritan tendencies in later life, it was a
Puritanism that did not eschew Catholicism. His was a religion of
constant reference to the Unseen. He was always a helper of those in
trouble for conscience' sake; and probably this was the reason he
supported the unpopular Vicar.

Shortly after, in 1635, there was a petition sent up from the
Corporation of Stratford for their wives to have the pew in Stratford
Church occupied by Dr. Hall, his wife, and his son-in-law and his wife.
Each family had a pew at each side of the church, while there was not
room for the burgesses' wives to sit or kneel in. It was true that the
said Mr. Hall had been a great benefactor to the church, and the Bishop
of the diocese had appointed him his pew; but his family were asked to
choose which of their large pews they preferred to keep, along with Mrs.
Woodward and Mrs. Lane, so that they might allow the aldermen's wives to
have the other.

John Hall died on November 25, 1635, and was buried next day in the
chancel of the parish church, though he had already disposed of the
lease of the tithes purchased by his father-in-law.

The burial register of the next day describes him as "Medicus
Peritissimus." By a nuncupative will, he left a house in London to his
wife, a house in Acton and a meadow to his daughter Elizabeth, and his
study of books to his son-in-law Thomas Nash. The manuscripts he would
have given to Mr. Boles had he been present, but Nash was to keep them
and use them as he pleased. It is probable that Mr. Boles was Richard
Boles, Rector of Whitnash, not far from Stratford--an eccentric person,
a writer of epitaphs, who had set up his own in his church while he yet
lived.[196]

On the monumental slab of Dr. Hall is a shield of arms: "Sable, three
talbots' heads erased or" for Hall, impaling Shakespeare or on a bend
"sable, a spear of the first, the point steeled." "Here lyeth ye Body of
John Hall, gent: Hee marr: Susanna ye daughter and coheire of Will:
Shakespeare, gent., Hee deceased Nov^r 25, Anno 1635, aged 60.

    "Hallius sic situs est, medica celeberrimus arte
      Expectans regni Gaudia laeta Dei;
    Dignus erat meritis qui nestora vinceret annis,
      In terris omnes, sed capit aequa dies;
    Ne tumulo quid desit adest fidessima conjux
      Est vitae comitem nunc quoq. mortis habet."[197]

It has been thought that this proves the epitaph was not written until
after Mrs. Hall's death. She may have wished the words set up, to
determine her resting-place; or Mr. Boles may have helped Thomas Nash
with the Latin.

After his death his son-in-law, Thomas Nash, came to reside at New
Place, and took the position of head of the family. Indeed, in one of
his letters he speaks of "Mrs. Hall, my mother-in-law, who lives with
me." But the house and everything in it, saving the study of books,
belonged to Mrs. Hall, of course.

We know nothing of the nature or the fate of the bulk of these
manuscripts, though many have longed to trace them. Possibly among them,
though it is not likely (being in bound volumes) were two notebooks of
Dr. John Hall's observations, from which James Cooke, a physician
introduced later to Mrs. Hall, translated the materials for a little
book entitled, "Select Observations on English Bodies; or, Cures both
Empericall and Historicall Performed on very Eminent Persons in
Desperate Diseases, first written in Latine by Mr. John Hall, Physician
living at Stratford-on-Avon in Warwickshire where he was very famous, as
also in the counties adjacent, as appears by these observations, drawn
out of severall hundreds of his as choycest, now put into English for
common benefit by James Cooke, practitioner in Physick and Surgery,
1657." Cooke, in the introduction, relates the strange manner in which
he became possessed of them, Mrs. Hall not knowing they were in her
husband's handwriting, and, believing they were part of a poor scholar's
mortgage, transferred them to him with other books. Cooke used the books
as guides in his own practice, and then expanded the contractions,
translated and published them, "being acquainted with his apothecary."
It is no slight compliment to a physician to have his cures published
twenty-two years after his death, and to have them run through more than
one edition. Cooke mentions: "Mr. John Hall had the happiness to lead
the way to that practice almost generally used now by the most knowing
of mixing scorbutics to most remedies." It is to Cooke we owe
information concerning Hall's education abroad; concerning the
physician, his relative, on terms of intimacy with Mrs. Hall, who
introduced him to New Place; and concerning the "other book" of Dr. John
Hall, also prepared for the press. We wonder what it contained.

The book published by Cooke records only _cures_. We are inclined to
echo, "Where are they that were drowned?" Doubtless Hall had attended
his father-in-law in his last illness, but his skill and affection were
not sufficient to save him. And because of this failure, we do not know
the symptoms shown by the poet after the traditional "merrymaking with
Ben Jonson and Drayton," when later gossips say he "drank too much." The
earliest _dated_ cure is 1617. But is it too much to imagine that the
undated illness of Drayton, recorded in "Obs. XXII.," occurred at the
same time as the death of the poet? Was he at any later time ill in
Warwickshire, and likely to be attended by Dr. John Hall? "Mr. Drayton,
an excellent poet, labouring of a Tertian, was cured by the following
treatment." Let us suppose it was April, 1616, and it may account for
the poet's illness, otherwise than by over-drinking.

In "Obs. XIX." Hall mentions without date an illness of his wife, Mrs.
Hall. "Obs. XXXVI." concerns his only daughter, and supports my opinion
of a constitutional delicacy of Anne Hathaway and her family. It is not
insignificant that her grandchild should suffer from "tortura oris," or
convulsions of the mouth, and ophthalmia. She was cured of one attack on
January 5, 1624. In the beginning of April she went to London, and on
returning on the 22nd of the same month, she took cold, and fell into
the same distemper, which affected the other side of her face. This
second time, "By the blessing of God, she was cured in sixteen days."
But on May 24 of the same year she was struck down with an erratic
fever. Sometimes she was hot, by-and-by sweating, again cold, all in the
space of half an hour. Her father's treatment again healed her; "the
symptoms remitted daily till she was well, thus was she delivered from
death and deadly diseases, and was well for many years." Many other
familiar names occur in this volume--"Mrs. Queeny," Mrs. Smith, Mr.
Wilson, Mrs. Throgmorton, Mrs. Sheldon, Mrs. Greene, John Nason, the
Underhills, Mrs. Baker, Dr. Thornbery, Bishop of Worcester (aged
eighty-six on February 1, 1633), Mrs. Combe, Katherine Sturley, "Mrs.
Grace Court, wife to my apothecary." In "Obs. LXIV." he speaks of
treating "the only son of Mr. Holyoake, which framed the dictionary."
"Obs. LXXXII.," Book II., records the restoration from the gates of
death of Mr. John Trapp, minister; and Obs. "LX.," Book II., gives an
account of Hall's own dangerous illness in 1632, when his anxious wife
sent for two physicians, who pulled him through; and he records his
prayer to God on the occasion. We must not forget that this was the date
of his quarrel with the Corporation.

The death of the young Quineys in 1638-39 affected the details of the
poet's will; for it may be remembered the property was settled on
Susanna Hall and her heirs male, failing whom, on the heirs male of
Elizabeth Hall, failing whom, on the heirs male of Judith, in default of
such heirs male, on the right heirs of William Shakespeare for ever. The
failure in the heirs male of Judith therefore entitled Elizabeth Nash to
the full inheritance as heir-general, and within a few weeks after the
unexpected death of her cousins, Susanna Hall, widow, joined with Mr.
and Mrs. Nash, May 27, 1639, in making a new settlement of Shakespeare's
entails on Mrs. Hall for life, after whom on Mr. and Mrs. Nash, and _the
longer liver of them_, after them, to the heirs of their body, and in
default of such, to the heirs of the said Elizabeth. Should she die
first without heirs, the property was secured to the _heirs and assignes
of the said Thomas Nash_, a reversion certainly not fair to Joan Hart,
the poet's sister, and her children. Still, it all seemed too far off to
consider. To this document Mrs. Hall appended her signature and her
seal, with the arms of Shakespeare impaled with those of Hall.

Thomas Nash seemed to have believed this fully settled everything on
himself, and that he was likely to outlive his mother-in-law and his
wife, for on August 20, 1642, he executed, without his wife's sanction
or knowledge, a mysterious will, that afterwards led to trouble.

The importance of New Place, the largest house in the town, and the
liberality and loyalty of its owners, were curiously signalized in the
following year. Queen Henrietta Maria, in July, 1643, marched from
Newark to Kineton by way of Stratford, where she was reinforced by
Prince Rupert and 2,000 men. She held her court for three days[198] in
Shakespeare's house, probably accompanied by only her immediate personal
attendants. On July 13, the Queen and Prince Rupert moved off to meet
the King in the vale of Kineton near Edgehill.[199]

Thomas Nash died on April 4, 1647, and was buried in the chancel beside
Shakespeare. "Heere resteth ye body of Thomas Nashe Esq. He mar.
Elizabeth, the daug. and Heire of John Halle, gent. He died Aprill 4, A.
1647. Aged 53.

    "Fata manent omnes, hunc non virtute carentem
      ut neque divitiis, abstulit atra dies
    Abstulit at referet lux ultima; siste, viator,
      si peritura paras per male parta peris."

The coat of arms was double quarterly of four, First, 1 and 4 argent on
a chevron between three ravens' heads erased azure, a pellet between 4
cross-crosslets sable, for Nash; 2 and 3 sable a buck's head caboshed
argent attired or, between his horns a cross patee, and across his mouth
an arrow, Bulstrode. Second, 1 and 4, for Hall, 2 and 3 Shakespeare.

When the notable will was opened, and proved in the following June, the
widow declined to follow out its provisions as concerned her own
property, which Thomas Nash had treated as if entirely his own. "Item, I
give, dispose and bequeath, unto my Kinsman Edward Nash, and to his
heires and assignes for ever, one messuage or tenement with the
appurtenances comonly called or knowne by the name of The New Place ...
together with all and singular howses, outhowses, barnes, stables,
orchards, gardens, etc, esteemed or enjoyed as thereto belonging ...
also fower yards of arable land meadowe and pasture ... in old
Stratford, and also one other tenement with the appurtenances in the
parish of ---- London; called or known by the name of the Wardropp, and
now in the tenure of one ---- Dickes."

Mrs. Nash had soldiers quartered on her at New Place during the very
month of her husband's death, one of whom was implicated in the robbery
of deer from the park of Sir Greville Verney on April 30, 1647. But she
did not fail in legal knowledge of what she ought to do under the
unexpected provisions of her husband's will, of which she was left sole
executrix and residuary legatee. She and her mother combined in levying
a fine on the property,[200] and reconveying it to the sole use of her
mother and herself, and their heirs for ever. She was not yet
thirty-nine years of age, and did not feel inclined even then to take it
for granted she would not marry again, even if Edward Nash agreed, as he
could be made to agree, that his inheritance could only come to him on
her decease without issue.

But Edward Nash did not like her proceedings, and filed a Bill in
Chancery on February, 1647-48, against Elizabeth Nash, and other
legatees, to compel them to produce his uncle's will in court, and
execute its provisions. Mrs. Nash admitted its contents, but averred the
testator had no power to demise property which had belonged to her
grandfather, and had been left to herself. She explained that her mother
was still living, and that in conjunction they had levied the fine. She
only disputed that part of her husband's will concerning her own
property, and mentioned her deeds and evidences. Her answer was taken by
commission, at Stratford, in April, 1648, and in June it was ordered
that the defendants should bring into court the will and other
evidences, and the writ was personally served on Mrs. Nash.

The will of Thomas Nash was produced before the Examiners in Chancery in
November, but Mrs. Nash defied all orders concerning the other
"evidences," as may be seen from the affidavit filed at the Six Clerks'
Office in December, 1649. She was brave in her determination that her
own rights and her mother's should not be assailed, and she was perhaps
prudent in her opinion that the fewer papers that were produced the
shorter time would the suit last. No replication or decree is recorded.
The litigation apparently terminated in a compromise, doubtless hastened
by Mrs. Nash's second marriage. Perhaps Edward Nash by this time
realized the injustice or the impracticability of his claim. The only
further allusion to it occurs in Lady Barnard's will.[201] She directs
her trustees to dispose of New Place with the proviso "that my loving
cousin, Edward Nash, Esq., shall have the first offer or refusal
thereof, according to _my promise formerly made to him_."

Elizabeth Nash married Mr. John Barnard, of Abington, Northamptonshire,
at Billesley, a village four miles from Stratford, June 5, 1649, where
the Trussels resided. Why did she go there to be married? A puzzling
question indeed, which cannot be answered by the register, as it is
lost. Whether her marriage weakened her mother's health, or whether the
state of her mother's health had hastened her marriage, we know not; but
a month later, on July 11, 1649, Mrs. Hall died, and, being buried
beside her husband on the 16th, _made his tomb complete_. The Latin
scholars of the family were all gone, and it is not too much to suppose
that Elizabeth herself, Shakespeare's grandchild, composed her mother's
epitaph:

"Here lyeth the body of Susanna, wife of John Hall, gent., the daughter
of William Shakespeare, gent. She deceased the 11 day of July, Anno
1649, aged 66.

    "Witty above her sex, but that's not all,
    Wise to Salvation was good Mistress Hall,
    Something of Shakespeare was in that, but this
    Wholly of him with whom she's now in blisse.
      Then, passenger, hast nere a tear
        To weep with her that wept with all
      That wept, yet set herself to chere
        Them up with comforts cordiall?
      Her love shall live, her mercy spread
      When thou hast nere a tear to shed."

A lozenge bore the arms of Hall and Shakespeare impaled. In the early
part of last century these verses were erased to make space for the
record of the death of one Richard Watts, who owned some of the tithes
and had the right to be buried in the chancel. But they, fortunately,
had been preserved by Dugdale;[202] and in 1844 the Watts record was
erased and Mrs. Hall's verses restored.

Her death limited Shakespeare's descendants to two--Judith Quiney,
daughter, and Elizabeth Barnard, granddaughter. A fine was levied on New
Place in 1650, in which John Barnard and Henry Smith were made trustees
to the settlement of 1647, instead of Richard Lane and William Smith. In
1652 a new settlement was made, devising it to the use of John Barnard
and his wife, and the longer liver of them, to the heirs of the body of
Elizabeth, failing whom to any persons she might name. In default of
such nomination, the property was to go to the right heirs of the
survivor. A fine was again levied on this settlement. Mr. John Barnard
was knighted by Charles II. in 1661. The Stratford Register of 1661-62
records the death of Elizabeth's aunt, Judith, "uxor Thomas Quiney,
gent., Feb. 9th, 1661-2." The use of the word "uxor" is no certain proof
that he was alive at the time.

Judith's death, at the age of seventy-seven, left Lady Elizabeth Barnard
the poet's sole survivor. She had no children by her second marriage,
about which we have no other detail. It has been surmised that it was
not a happy one. Sir John Barnard was a widower, and had already a
family. There is no mention of this family in Lady Barnard's will, and a
limitation to the barest law and justice towards her husband, whom she
did not leave her executor. The will was drawn up on January 29,
1669-70, and she died at Abington in February. "Madam Elizabeth Bernard,
wife of Sir John Bernard, Knight, was buried 17th Feb., 1669-70."[203]
No sepulchral monument was raised in memory of the granddaughter and
heir of Shakespeare, but she probably lay in the same tomb as her
husband, who died in 1674. A memorial slab still remains to his memory
in Abington Church, but the place of his burial is unknown, and the
vault below this stone is used by another family.

By his death his wife's will[204] came into force, written while she was
still "in perfect memory--blessed be God!--and mindful of mortality."
She recounted the settlement of April 18, 1653, to which the trustees
were Henry Smith, of Stratford, gent., and Job Dighton, of the Middle
Temple, London, Esquire. Henry Smith, her surviving trustee, or his
heirs, six months after the death of her husband, Sir John Barnard, was
to sell New Place, giving the first offer to her loving cousin, Edward
Nash, and the money was to be used in legacies. Her cousin, Thomas
Welles, of Carleton, in county Bedford, was to have L50 if he be alive,
and if he be dead, her kinsman, Edward Bagley, citizen of London, was to
receive the amount. How she was connected with these men I have been
unable to find out. "Judith Hathaway, one of the daughters of my
kinsman, Thomas Hathaway, late of Stratford," L5 a year or L40 in hand.
Unto Joane, the wife of Edward Kent, another daughter of the said Thomas
Hathaway, L50, failing whom to her heir, _Edward Kent the younger_, at
his coming of age. To this same Edward Kent she left L30 for his
apprenticeship. To Rose, Elizabeth, and Susanna, three other "daughters
of my kinsman, Thomas Hathaway, L40 a piece." Henry Smith was to have L5
for his pains, and Edward Bagley to be residuary legatee. "To my
kinsman, Thomas Hart, the son of Thomas Hart, late of Stratford, all
that my other messuage or Inne commonly called the Maydenhead, with the
next house thereto adjoining, with the barne belonging to the same, now
in the occupation of Michael Johnson; to Thomas Hart and his heirs,
failing whom to his brother George Hart and his heirs," failing whom to
her own right heirs for ever. She made her "loving kinsman Edward
Bagley" executor, "in witness of which I set my hand and seal." It may
be seen that she retained absolute power of the poet's purchases, but
justly left his inheritance from his father John to his sister's
descendants. But she did no more than justice.

It is not clear how the connection is traced between her and her other
legatees, but it is very noticeable her preference for the Hathaway
connections to those of the Shakespeare side.

Ere she died the poet's Blackfriars tenement had been reduced to ashes
in the Great Fire of 1666. What right in it or its site remained,
accrued to Edward Bagley, "citizen of London," her executor and
residuary legatee, who proved her will, March 4, 1669, though it is
stated to have been sold in Shakespeare's Biography in the Dictionary.

Edward Nash did not buy New Place, after all. It was bought by Sir
Edward Walker, at one time Secretary of War to Charles I., and then
Garter King-at-Arms. Halliwell-Phillipps states[205] it was sold by the
"surviving trustee," but Sir Edward Walker's own will[206] puts it a
little differently. He left to his dear daughter Barbara, wife of Sir
John Clopton, various bequests, among which appear "A yarde land in
Stratford field I bought of _Mr. Hall_, of the value of L12 10s. by year
... fyftly Land I bought of Sir John Clopton in the mannor of Clopton,
of the yearely value of L10. Sixtly 4 yard land lying in Stratford and
Bishopton fields which I bought of _Mr. Bagley_, and a house called the
New Place, situated in the Towne of Stratford upon Avon, of the yearely
value about fyfty fyve pounds ... my deare daughter and her husband Sir
John Clopton, sole executors, 30th June, 1676." He died early the
following year, and his will was proved March 10, 1676-77.

Thus, the property Shakespeare had put together became dispersed shortly
after his family became extinct, and New Place came back to the heirs of
the Cloptons, from whom it was purchased. I had hoped we might find
something from the will of Edward Bagley, but he died intestate,[207]
and the administration mentions nothing of interest to Shakespeare.

It is therefore quite clear that the whole period covered by
Shakespeare's life and that of his descendants was 105 years, _i.e._,
from 1564 to 1669, and that _no lineal descendants can survive_. Yet, as
if in illustration of the methods of fabrication of tradition, when it
is desired, I have heard of many of the name who boast a _lineal descent
from the poet_; and of one even who boasts of having inherited not only
_the Shakespeare's_ dinner-service, but his _teapot_! Yet that the
presence of the name is a certain bar to the descent, as above shown, no
such claimants seem to have taken the trouble to find out, as they
easily might do. I am told that in Verona, by the tomb of Romeo and
Juliet, a modern visitor has described himself as "Shakespeare,
_descendant_ of the poet who wrote the play." William Shakespeare's
poems alone are his posterity.

Even under another name they are not to be accepted.[208] In the
_Cambridge Chronicle_ obituary, January 1, 1842, appears: "Died on the
28th ult. at Exning, Suffolk, aged 87, Mrs. Hammond, mother of Mr. Wm.
Hammond, of No. 8, Scots Yard, Cannon Street, London, Indigo Merchant.
The deceased was one of the few remaining descendants of Shakespeare."
So lately as June, 1857, there was recorded the death of William
Hammond, Esq., of London, "one of the last lineal descendants of
Shakespeare."

Dr. Bigsby says that Colonel Gardner, descendant of the Barnards, had
some Shakespeare letters, and claimed descent from Lady Elizabeth
Barnard.[209]

A correspondent remembered to have seen when a boy the Shakespear Inn,
Lower Northgate Street, Gloucester, kept by an old gentleman named
Smith. Outside the passage to the inn was a signboard, "The Shakespear
Inn, by William Smith, descendant from and next of kin to that immortal
bard."[210]

       *       *       *       *       *

   JOHN SHAKESPEARE'S FAMILY.

                          Richard Shakespeare, = wife uncertain,
       farmer, of Snitterfield, held land from |
       Robert Arden, Mary Arden's father.      |
                                               |
       -------------------------------------------------
       |                  |                            |
     Thomas.            John, = Mary Arden.         Henry.
       |           eldest son |
     John                     |
   b. March 10, 1581-2        |
                              |
      ------------------------------------------------------------------
      |      |     |          |                 |          |          |
     Two     |  Gilbert     Joan, = William   Anne,     Richard,   Edmund,
    daus.,   |  b. 1566;  b. 1569;  Hart.     b. 1571;  b. 1573;   b. 1580;
      d.     |  d. 1611.  d. 1646.            d. 1579.  d. 1612.   d. 1607.
   infants.  |
             |
          William, = Anne
          the poet.| Hathaway.
                   |
     --------------------------------------------
     |                      |                   |
   Susanna, = John       Hamnet,             Judith, = Thomas
   b.1583;  | Hall.      b.1585;       b.1585; twin  | Quiney.
   d.1649.  |            d.1596.       with Hamnet,  |
            |                               d.1662   |
            |                                        |
   Elizabeth, m. 1st, Thomas Nash;      ---------------------------
   2nd, Sir John Barnard, b.1607-8;     |            |            |
          d. _s.p._ 1669.                 |            |            |
                                   Shakespeare,   Richard,      Thomas,
                                        b.1616;   b.1617;       b.1619-20;
                                        d.1617.   d.1638-9.     d.1638-9.
                                                    _s.p._           _s.p._

FOOTNOTES:

[178] Gwillim's "Display of Heraldry," p. 315.

[179] _Ibid._, pp. 378, 420.

[180] Hathaway is also a name in the Beverston Registers (_Notes and
Queries_, Fifth Series, xii., 101).

[181] French, "Shakespeareana Genealogicae," p. 376.

[182] Will dated August 26, 1642, proved April 4, 1647. He also left
rings to his uncle Nash and his aunt, his cousin Sadler and his wife,
_his cousin_ Richard Quiney and his wife _his cousin_ Thomas Quiney and
his wife.

[183] Stratford Burial Registers.

[184] The inscription would imply that she was born in 1556; but, as in
her husband's case, it may be she was reckoned as sixty-seven very
shortly after completing her sixty-sixth year, or even before she
completed it, as was done in the case of Lady Joyce Lucy. We may note,
at least, that Shakespeare, fifty-three in 1616, is only seven years
younger than one reckoned sixty-seven in 1623.

[185] Henry Waters, "Genealogical Gleanings."

[186] See coats of arms of the burgesses, Guildhall MS. 491.

[187] "Outlines," i. 219.

[188] Acton Registers.

[189] See Worcester Wills and Marriage Licenses.

[190] See List of Noblemen and Gentlemen of Warwick, 1577, by Henry
Ferrers; Nichols's "Coll. Top. et Gen.," vii., p. 298, and State Papers,
Dom. Ser., Eliz., 137 (38).

[191] State Papers, Dom. Ser., Eliz., lxiii. 55.

[192] The arms of these Halls were three talbots' heads erased sable,
between nine cross-crosslets azure. Shakespeare's son-in-law bore the
talbots' heads only, which may merely have been a mark of cadency. A
suit in Chancery in the time of Elizabeth was brought by Giles Fletcher,
LL.D., Joan his wife, and Phineas his eldest son, against John Hall (not
the physician) concerning the site of the manor of Henwick and the land
of Hallow. In the chapel is a mural monument to Edward Hall, Esq., who
married Anna, eldest daughter of Sir Paul Tracey, having by her four
sons and seven daughters. He died September, 1616, aged fifty-four.
Addit. MSS., Brit. Mus., 19,816.

[193] It has been suggested by Mr. A. Hall that he might have been son
of the John Hall who married Elizabeth Carew, niece to Sir Nicholas
Throckmorton. He had a son of the name.

[194] Stratford Registers.

[195] Miscellaneous Documents and Corporation Records,
Stratford-on-Avon.

[196] _Notes and Queries_, Fifth Series, vii. 287.

[197] Dugdale's "Warwickshire Antiquities," ed. 1656, p. 518. This may
be translated thus: "Here is the dust of Hall, most famous in medical
art, awaiting the glorious joys of the Kingdom of God. Worthy was he to
have surpassed Nestor in well-earned years, in every land, but impartial
Time has snatched him away. Lest anything be wanting to the tomb, his
most faithful spouse is there, and he has the companion of life now also
in death."

[198] Sir Hugh Clopton to Theobald.

[199] Halliwell-Phillipps, "Outlines," ii. 108.

[200] Easter Term, 23 Car. I.

[201] Somerset House, 96, Alchin, also in Juxon.

[202] "Warwickshire Antiquities," ed. 1656, p. 518.

[203] Abington Parish Registers.

[204] Somerset House, 96, Alchin, also in Juxon.

[205] Halliwell-Phillipps, "Outlines," ii. 119.

[206] Somerset House, 36 Hale.

[207] Admin., October, 1686; Somerset House.

[208] _Morning Herald_--Obituary.

[209] _Notes and Queries_, Fifth Series, VII. 287. But she had no
children, as proved both by the registers and the wills. She was Sir
John Barnard's second wife.

[210] _Ibid._, 519. Smith really descended from the Harts.




CHAPTER X

COLLATERALS


John Shakespeare had other sons than William. There were three--Gilbert,
Richard and Edmund. These all died comparatively young, and none of them
was married.

Edmund, the youngest child of John and Mary Shakespeare, seems to have
been the only one who followed his eldest brother to London. He also
chose the stage as a profession, but we never hear of any success. From
London registers we know that on August 12, 1607, in the parish of St.
Giles', Cripplegate, was buried "Edward, the base-born son of Edward
Shakespeare, Player," and that on December 31 of the same year was
buried within the Church of St. Saviour's, Southwark,[211] "Edmund
Shakespeare, Player," "with a forenoon knell of the Great Bell."[212]
The poet paid every honour he could to his brother.

Gilbert, born two and a half years after William, seemed often to have
been his practical helper and representative in Stratford-on-Avon. Some
writers have imagined that because the clerk added the word "adolescens"
to the burial entry in 1611 of "Gilbert Shakespeare,"[213] that it could
not have been this Gilbert, but some other, probably a young son of his.
But there is no record of a marriage, of the birth of any child, of the
death of his wife, or of his own death, if this entry be given another
translation than the natural one. We may well imagine the clerk did not
fully understand the meaning of the word. Shakespeare often satirizes
the ignorant use of learned terms at his time. There is no saying what
hazy notions might have floated through the writer's brain of the age or
position of the defunct. He would be no worse than a Mrs. Malaprop if he
intended "adolescens" to represent "deeply regretted."

Of the last surviving brother, Richard, born 1573, we know nothing,
except that he died February 12, in the year 1612-13.[214]

The negative evidence of the registers is supported by the negative
evidence of the Shakespeare wills; there is no mention of a Shakespeare
in the wills of William Shakespeare (so anxious to perpetuate his family
and his name) or in those of his descendants.

We may therefore hold it as proved that there are no collateral lines of
Shakespeares descending from the poet's brothers, and therefore none
entitled to bear John Shakespeare's famous coat of arms without a new
grant. Yet we find some bearing the arms, and many claimants of such
descent. Sir Thomas Winnington asks if the Shaksperes of Fillongly are a
branch of the poet's family, as the well-known armorial bearings appear
on the tomb of George Shakespeare, who died there in 1690.[215]

The Rev. Mr. Dyer wrote to Mr. Duncombe from Coningsby, November 24,
1756: "My wife's name was Ensor, whose grandmother was a Shakespeare,
descended from the brother of everybody's Shakespeare."[216] Such claims
may be explained by a natural error. Another John Shakespeare has often
been mistaken for ours, and real pedigrees have been traced back to him.

But there _were_ collateral descents from Shakespeare's sister. The only
person who might have impaled the new Shakespeare arms, had he himself
borne arms to make this possible, was William Hart, the hatter, who
married Shakespeare's sister Joan, and who lived in Shakespeare's old
house in Henley Street, and died a few days before the poet.[217] The
pedigree of the Harts is printed in French's "Shakespeareana
Genealogica,"[218] and need not be repeated here. The Rev. Cornelius
Hallen[219] also gives a genealogical table of the various connections,
and thus provides us with the collateral descent nearly up to date.

Though the early members of this family seem to have been content with a
very modest position and very unromantic occupations, the later members
have become more ambitious.

The Harts thought of contesting the will of Lady Barnard, who, with her
mother, Mrs. Hall, had cut off the entail, or rather altered, as they
thought, the proviso of Shakespeare's will regarding his heirs. But, as
she left them the Henley Street house, and a contest for more would have
been attended with certain expense and uncertain results, they on full
consideration let the matter drop.

Even from this family sprang claimants for lineal descent. On a
tombstone in Tewkesbury appears: "In Memory of John Hart, the sixth
descendant from the poet Shakespeare, who died January 22, 1800, aged
45," etc.

[Illustration: SNITTERFIELD CHURCH.

_To face p. 113_]

FOOTNOTES:

[211] Registers of St. Saviour's, Southwark.

[212] Churchwardens' Accounts, St. Saviour's, Southwark.

[213] Stratford-on-Avon Registers.

[214] Stratford-on-Avon Registers.

[215] _Notes and Queries_ December, 1865, Third Series, viii. 501.

[216] _Ibid._, Sixth Series, xii. 424.

[217] April 17, 1616.

[218] P. 296.

[219] See "Descent of Hallen and Shakespeare."




CHAPTER XI

COUSINS AND CONNECTIONS


It is certain that Shakespeare had many cousins on the Arden side. A
notice of the Stringers, the Lamberts, the Edkins, and the Webbes has
been already given. The Hart family, as has also been noticed, provided
a large number of relatives not of the name.

On the Shakespeare side the poet _may_ have had cousins, though we are
not able to prove their descent from records at present in hand. More
than one family claim to have descended from cousins, and presumably
from Shakespeare's grandfather Richard. But we must not forget there
were other Richards at his time. The Richard of Wroxall, Mr. Yeatman
insists, must be the same as the Richard of Snitterfield, though it
seems hardly possible, seeing we find the one officially associated with
the Priory of Wroxall 26 Henry VIII., 1535,[220] and the other presented
for non-suit of court at Snitterfield 20 and 22 Henry VIII.; for
infringing the rights of pasture there, October 1, 1535; and receiving a
legacy from a friend that suggested continued residence: "Unto Richard
Shakespere of Snytfield my foure oxen which are now in his keeping"
(will of Thomas Atwode, _alias_ Tailor, of Stratford-on-Avon, 1543).
Three successive Richards lived in Rowington. One, "Richard Shakysspere,
of Rowington, Weyver," died in 1560, and mentioned his sons William and
Richard in his will drawn up the year before, on June 15, and proved on
June 30 (goods prised by John Shakspere and Richard Sanders). Another
Richard of the same place made a will in 1591 and died in 1592, whose
children were John, Roger, Thomas, William, and Dorothy Jenkes; his
wife's name was Joan. There was also a grandson, Thomas, son of
John.[221] Another Richard died in 1614,[222] whose eldest son was
William. But each of these Richards, from his family and connections,
can be proved to be a different man from the Richard of Snitterfield. We
are reasonably sure that our John was the son of the latter, if he
administered his goods after his death in 1560-61[223]; and if so, we
are sure that Henry also was his son, as Henry was the brother of John.
This is mentioned in the Declaration of 1587,[224] when Nicholas Lane
proceeded against John as surety for his impecunious brother Henry.
Henry was also summoned with John to appear as witness in the Mayowe and
Webbe case, 23 Elizabeth. He had a wife called Margaret, whose death
immediately follows his own in the Register of Snitterfield;[225] but we
are not sure that he had any children. "Henry Sakspere was buryed the
29th day of Dec., 1596." "Margaret Sakspere, widow, being tymes the wyff
of Henry Sakspere, was bured ix Feb., 1596." It is quite probable that
when Robert Webbe married and settled in Snitterfield, or Edward
Cornwall came into power there, that Henry moved thence.[226] Just about
the time we find in the Registers of Hampton-on-Avon or Bishop Hampton,
"Lettyce, daughter of Henry Shakespeare of Ingon,[227] bapt. June 4th,
1583." "Jeames, son of Henry Shakespeare, bapt. Oct. 15th, 1585." Yet he
appears as one of "the pledges" at the baptism of Henry Townsend, of
Snitterfield, September 4, 1586. "Jeames Shakespeare, of Ingon, buried
Oct. 25th, 1589,"[228] is also mentioned by Malone. This is the correct
reading of the "Joannes" mentioned by Halliwell-Phillipps as being
buried in the same place so near the same date as September 25, 1589.

A William Shakespeare appears once in Snitterfield as prising the goods
of John Pardu in 1569; but we do not know his age and residence, and
there is no clue to any relationship with him.

A William prised the goods of Robert Shakespeare of Wroxall, 1565, and
the goods of John Shaxper of Rowington, 1574.

An Anthony occurs among the billmen of Snitterfield in the muster book
of 1569. John Shakespeare of Rowington, who held land at Wroxall 22
Henry VIII., had a son Antonio, rather an unusual name. Tradition says
the poet had an uncle or grand-uncle, Antonio. But we must beware of
using tradition as a staff to lean upon. No Anthony appears in any
family papers. An Antony Shaxspeare married Joane Whitrefe at Budbrook
(in which parish is Hampton Corley), November 14, 1573; and in the
Register we find: "Henrie Shackspere sonne of Shackspere and Joane his
wife, baptized 24th March, 1575." "Elizabeth, daughter to Antony
Shaksper of Hamton, baptized Feb. 10th, 1583," in the Stratford
Registers; and "Henry, son of Antonio Shakespeare, buried June 18th,
1583," in Clifford Chambers. This wandering makes his life rather
confusing to us.

Thomas Shakespeare _might_ have been an uncle. Thomas was presented as a
regrator or forestaller of barley and wheat at Snitterfield Court, held
April, 1575. A Thomas, probably the same, appears in Stratford Records
between 23 and 28 Elizabeth. He was sued for the price of malted barley
in 23 Elizabeth. He had a son named John, baptized at Snitterfield March
10, 1581-2. Of this child we know nothing further, but I make a
suggestion in a later chapter that may interest readers.

There was a Johanna Shakespeare,[229] whose burial record in
Snitterfield, in 1595, makes no allusion to any male relative. She might
have been an aunt, a great-aunt, or even a grandmother of the poet, and
the widow of Richard. Similar entries of wives and widows have been
found in the neighbourhood. Joan was an important name in John
Shakespeare's eyes, and he gave the name to two of his daughters.

Richard had probably a daughter who became Mrs. Green. A "Thomas Green,
_alias_ Shakespeare," was buried in Stratford-on-Avon, March 6, 1590. He
was probably the father of Thomas Green, solicitor, in whose "Diary and
Correspondence" we find allusions to his cousin Shakespeare: "My cosen
Shakspeare has commyng yesterday to towne; I went to see him how he
did."[230] Jovis, Nov. 17.

It was he who conducted the Addenbrooke prosecution (1608), at which
time, we know not for what reason, he appears to have been living in
Shakespeare's home, New Place, in Stratford-on-Avon.

There might have been an indefinite number of cousins by marriage among
the Hathaways. I only mention this now in relation to one strange
example of the desire of association somehow with Shakespeare. In the
catalogue of the Shakespeare Library of Warwick Castle is the title of a
book written by a Hathaway clergyman of Tewkesbury, said to be "a
descendant of Anne Hathaway," ignoring the fact that _Anne Hathaway_ was
_Mrs. Shakespeare_. Yet he might after all have been a cousin twice
removed.

FOOTNOTES:

[220] See "Valor Ecclesiasticus," Warwickshire, at Dissolution, Henry
VIII.

[221] Worcester wills.

[222] _Ibid._

[223] Admin. Bond at Worcester.

[224] "Henricus Shaksper, frater dicti Johannis," February 1, 29
Elizabeth, 1587.

[225] Snitterfield Registers.

[226] Henry had a fight with Edward Cornwall, and drew blood, October
12, 1574. See Halliwell-Phillipps, "Outlines," vol. ii., p. 209.

[227] Ingon is in the parish of Hampton-on-Avon.

[228] Malone's "Life," vol. ii., p. 23, ed. 1821.

[229] "Johana Shaxspere mortua est et sepulta January quinto, anno
1595." No record has been found of the death of Richard's wife, if this
be not she.

[230] Green's "Diary," Nov. 17, 1614, Stratford-on-Avon Records. See
also Ingleby's "Shakespeare and the Enclosure of Welcombe." Thomas Green
was a Councillor of Middle Temple and a solicitor. (See Quyney's Town
Accounts, January and February, 1600-1.) He was appointed Steward of the
Court of Record, Stratford-on-Avon, on September 7, 1603. There was no
Town Clerk then, and the Steward did the duties until the Charter
granted to the town by James I., July 8, 1610, created the office of
Town Clerk. He held part of the remainder of the tithes, the half of
which were held by Shakespeare.




CHAPTER XII

CONTEMPORARY WARWICKSHIRE SHAKESPEARES


Outside the immediate family of the poet there were many contemporaries
in Warwickshire, who may have been connected in some far-off degree.

There was the John Shakespeare, shoemaker, who came to Stratford about
1580, probably as apprentice or journeyman of Roberts, the shoemaker, in
whose house he dwelt till 1594, and whose daughter Margery he
married.[231] He became Member of the Company of Shoemakers and
Saddlers, paying L3, in 1580, and Master of the Shoemakers' Company, and
was elected Ale-taster for the town in 1585. He paid 30s. for his
freedom January 19, 1585-86, and became Constable in the autumn of 1586.
His wife was buried on October 29, 1587, but he must shortly afterwards
have married again, as he had three children christened[232] in the
parish church. On February 17, 1587, he was in receipt of Thomas Oken's
money, and in 1588 became guardian to Thomas Roberts's sons. The poet's
father, after 1570, was always mentioned as Mr. John Shakespeare; this
other appears simply as John, or John the Shoemaker, or Corvizer, or
some other epithet (see Records of Stratford-on-Avon). Hunter thinks
that he was the third son of Thomas Shakespeare, a shoemaker, of
Warwick, who held land under the manor of Balsall, and mentioned in his
will, 1557, four children--William, Thomas, John and Joan, ux. Francis
Ley, mentioned in Warwick registers.

This John of Stratford seems to have left the town before 1595, as his
house was inhabited by others then, and no further mention appears of
him in record or register.

Beside John Shakespeare's _double_ of Stratford-on-Avon, there was a
John Shakespeare of Clifford Chambers, a village a mile or two out of
Stratford, who has also been confused with him. He married there, on
October 15, 1560, Julian Hobbyns, widow. He sued William Smith, of
Stratford, for debt, in 1572; and in the will of John Ashwell, of
Stratford, 1583, it is stated that "John Shakespeare, of Clifford
Chambers, was in his debt." It is quite probable he was the John often
in debt, who had "no goods to seize," in Stratford-on-Avon, generally
supposed to be the poet's father.

Other notices of the name, besides the Henry and Antonio
above-mentioned, appear in the Clifford Registers. Charles Malary and
Alice Shakespeare were married in 1579. Katharine Morris, servant to
John Shakespeare, was buried in 1587; Julian Shakespere buried July 22,
1608; John Shakespere buried October 20, 1610. His will was proved at
Gloucester in 1611. These latter dates set the question of identity at
rest.

An agricultural John was in occupation of Ingon in 1570.[233] I believe
him to be our John, the brother and surety of Henry. We must not forget
that as Ingon was so near Snitterfield, John of Ingon _may_ be the John
Shakespeare, _Agricola_, of Snitterfield, who administered Richard's
goods, and was fined, October 1, 1561, at the Snitterfield Court. And
there are many Johns of Rowington, fully entered in Mr. Rylands'
"Records of Rowington."

Just as his father had _doubles_, so had William. There was a William
Shakespeare drowned in the Avon, and buried at St. Nicholas, Warwick,
July 6, 1579.[234] The world would not have known what it had lost had
this fate overtaken "our Will," but it makes us shiver now as we think
of it, even as a past possibility. It has been thought that this youth
was the son of Thomas Shakespeare, shoemaker, of Warwick, and brother of
John the shoemaker of Stratford. But he seems rather young for that
relationship.

Another contemporary William seems to have been in a small way of
business as a farmers' agent, sometimes as a lender, and sometimes as a
borrower. Among the Shakespeare manuscripts at Warwick Castle are
preserved bonds for 2s. 6d. for a quarter of a year's use of L5 by
William Shakespeare in 1620, 1624, and 1626. Another of "three quarters
of oats to Will Shakespeare for a quarter's use of L5 due upon the 10th
of May last, 1621," and some for the sale of malt.[235]

It has seemed to me much more than probable that this was the William
who sued Philip Rogers in the Court of Record at Stratford-on-Avon,[236]
in 1604 for the price of a strike of malt sold and other money due. "The
declaration filed by William Shexspere" in the Court has been accepted
by Halliwell-Phillipps and all the Baconians as concerning the poet.
But, in the first place, any such declaration at that date would then
have designated our Shakespeare "gent."; in the second, he would have
employed his cousin, Thomas Greene, as his attorney, and not William
Tetherton, and Thomas Greene would have spelt his name otherwise than it
is written. In the third place, there is no corroborative testimony that
the poet ever sold malt, and there is concerning this contemporary
William.

The early registers of Rowington are lost, but we have shown from the
wills that there were Shakespeares there bearing this Christian name.
The Richard of Rowington who died in 1561 mentions a son William in his
will. The second Richard of that place had a son William mentioned in
the will of 1591. The third Richard and his wife Elizabeth had four
sons--William, Richard, Thomas, John, and a daughter Joan. William had
worked as a labourer without wages on his father's property, with
expectation of succeeding to it. But some years before his father's
death he went, with his father's permission, out to service, and married
a certain Mrs. Margery. His father was incensed against him, and left
the little property to his youngest son, John, November 13, 1613, proved
in 1614.[237] Legal proceedings were commenced in 1614 at Worcester by
William about the property of his mother, Elizabeth. A Chancery suit
between the brothers was instituted in the Star Chamber,[238] and the
case was heard at Warwick, in 1616, before four Commissioners, one of
whom was Francis Collins, gent., the overseer of the will of the poet.
William the plaintiff was then about forty years old. This is probably
the same man who felt injured by his family while supported by his
wife's money in his lawsuits. The mark of a William Shakespeare is found
on a roll of the Customs of the Manor of Rowington, confirmed by the
jury in 1614. Was he the same? And if not, which of these was the
William Shakespeare whose name appears in the list of the trained
soldiers of Rowington,[239] taken before Sir Fulke Greville at Alcester,
September 23, 1605, erroneously by some believed to be the poet?[240]

There is preserved a petition of William Shaxsper, Richard Shuter, and
others of Rowington, co. Warwick, to the Committee for the Safety of
Coventry and Warwick. About St. Andrew's Day they had some sea-coal
which lay at Barford, near Warwick, which they had sold to Lady Lucy,
but the soldiers of the city finding fuel scarce, had burnt L5 10s.
worth of it. They pray satisfaction for their coals. Underwritten by Mr.
Basnet is an order to pay this sum, April, 1646.[241]

A William Shakespeare, of Hatton, married Barbara Stiffe in 1589; styled
"gent." at baptism of his daughter _Susannah_, 1596. John Weale granted
to Job Throgmorton the cottage in which William Shakespeare dwelt at
Haseley, March 4, 1597.[242]

In the Star Chamber proceedings is the notice of a fine levied "inter
Willielmum Shackespeare et Georgium Shackespeare, quer. et Thomam
Spencer, arm. Christopherum Flecknoe et Thomam Thompson deforc. de octo
acris pasturae cum pertinentiis in Claverdon, alias Claredon, 12 Jac. I.
(1615)."[243]

I have collected these illustrations in order to show that the name
William was not by any means rare in the Shakespeare family, and to
account for some of the errors made concerning descents.

In 1589, also in the Star Chamber proceedings, we find there is a case
brought by "Mary Ruswell against John Vale and Katharine his wife, and
Aylese Shackspire." This Alice Shakespeare was John Vale's mother-in-law
and a widow. Is it not possible she might be the sister "Alice
Shakespeare" referred to in the Griffin will?

In most of the Warwickshire districts where the name is found in the
earlier half of the sixteenth century it is found in the latter half,
and also in the seventeenth century, though sometimes branches migrated
to new neighbouring localities. It would be impossible to work out every
family in detail in a work such as this.

And yet some notices are necessary to complete the rapid survey. The
Shakespeares appear in two groups, one north and east of
Stratford-on-Avon, as at Ingon and Snitterfield. One family had settled
at Tachbrook, nine miles north-east by east from Stratford. There was
baptized "Roger, son of Robert Shakespeare, 21 April, 1557." Robert was
a weaver, and was probably son of Richard Shakespeare, of Haseley,
weaver, in the reign of Henry VIII. He had also a son John, born 1574; a
daughter, Alice, buried 1559; another, Isabel, baptized 1560.

Roger married Isabel Parkins in 1592, and Alice Higgins in 1595, and
seems to have had a son, John, not in the register. But on April 22,
1628, Elizabeth Shakespeare, the daughter of John and Christian his
wife, was baptized, and on April 4, 1630, Judith Shakespeare, the
daughter of John and Christian Shakespeare. Later generations of the
families of Roger, John, and Walter are recorded there.[244]

A few Shakespeares have been found in Alcester. But the older centre lay
further north. By far the greatest number of names are found in the
villages to the west of a line drawn between Coventry and Warwick,
including Meriden, Hampton-in-Arden, Berkswell, Knowle, Balsall,
Kenilworth, Packwood, Lapworth, Baddesley Clinton, Wroxall, Haseley,
Hatton, Rowington, and Budbrooke.

The early parish registers of Wroxall are lost, and only begin with
1586.

    On Dec. 9, 1588, Fraunces Shaxper ... was buried.
    May 29, 1592, Nicholas Shaxper and Alice Edmunds m.
    March 25, 1593, Peter, fil. Nicolas and Alice Shaxper, bap.
    Nov. 17, 1594, Susannah, daugh. of Nicolas and Alice Shaxper, bap.
    Sep. 17, 1595, Elizabeth, ux. William Shaxper, buried.
    Sep. 10, 1596, Cornelius, fil. Nic. and Alice Shaxper, bap.
    Feb. 3, 1599, Annah, dau. of Nic. and Alice Shaxper, bapt.
    April 9th, 1600, Annah, dau. of Nic. and Alice Shaxper, buried.
    June 15th, 1603, Hester, dau. of Nic. and Alice Shaxper, bapt.
                (No Registers from 1604 to 1641.)
    1641, Peter Shakspeare buried.
    May 17th, 1642, William Smith and Catherine Shakspere, m.
    Sept. 25, 1645, Nicolas Shakspere buried.
    May 16th, 1665, Ralf Stokes and Margaret Shakspeare m.
    Jan. 26, 1670, Robert Shakespeare and Ann Averne m.
    Oct. 4, 1678, Jane, dau. of Robert Shakespeare the elder, buried.
    March 29, 1681, Robert, fil. Richard Shakespeare and his wife, bapt.
    May 30, 1714, Ann, ux. Robert Shakespeare, buried.
    May 13, 1719, Robert Shakespeare buried.

From the Hatton and Haseley Registers, which recorded the death of Roger
Shakespeere, 1558, and of Domina Jane, 1571, we also find:

    Isabel, uxor Thomas Shakspere, formerly wife of John Tybotes,
        buried April 4, 1570.
    Nov. 5, 1570, Katharine Shakespere, filia Nicolas Shakespere, bapt.
    Jan. 6th, 1579, Elizabeth, dau. of Nicolas Shakespere, bapt.
    Jan. 6th, 1589, William Shakespere and Barbara Stiffe, married.
    March 25, 1593, Peter, son of Nicolas and Alice Shakespeare, bapt.
    Sept. 8, 1593, Thomas, son of Nicholas and Elizabeth Shakspere, bapt.
    March 14, 1596, Susannah, dau. of Wm. Shakspere, gentleman, and
        Barbara, bapt. (March 6th, 1597. This child was buried.)
    July 23rd, 1598, Katherine, dau. of Wm. and Barbara Shakspere,
        baptised.
    Sep. 21, 1606, Thomas Shaxper buried.
    Dec. 26, 1607, Nicholas Shaksper of Busall buried.
    Jan. 26, 1607, Elizabeth Shaksper of Busall buried.
    Aug. 28, 1608, Marie, daughter of Thomas Shaxsper, bapt.
    Feb.--, 1610, Barbara, wife of Mr. William Shakspere, buried.
    Jan. 20, 1612, John Hastings and Susanna Shaxper, married.

The parish registers of Haseley and of Hatton are mixed.

There are many Shakespeare wills preserved in Lichfield. Christopher
Shakespere of Packwood, August 31, 1551, proved August 15, 1558,
mentions a wife Isabel, and sons, Richard, William, Roger, Christopher,
and John, and daughters Alice and Agnes; Elizabeth Shakspere of St.
Werbergs, Derby, 1558; Roger Shakspere of Tachbrook, August 2, 1605;
wife Alice and son John; William Shakespeare of Coventry, shoemaker,
March 18, 1605-6; Administration of John Shakespeare's goods, 1606;
Thomas Shakespeare of Packington Parva, April 28, 1610, had a wife,
Phillip, and sons, George (who was to have Coleshill lands), Thomas,
Andrew, and a daughter, Alice Croft; Anne Shakespeare of Knowle's will,
1743.

There has been a group entered in the Calendar in relation to the
Shakespeare and Ensor connection (Nichols's "Herald and Genealogist,"
vol. ii., p. 297):

    Thomas Shakespeare of Coventry, admin. 1693.
    George Shakespeare of Fillongley, will 1700.
    Sara Shakespeare of Pen,        admin. 1712.
    Thomas Shakespeare of Arley,      "    1720.
    William Shakespear of Coventry,   "    1724.
    William Shakespear of Arley,      "    1729.
    George Shakespear of Coleshill,   "    1734.
    Anne Shakespeare of Coventry,     "    1751.
    George Shakespeare of Fillongley, "    1754.
    Mary Shakespeare of Aston,        "    1768.


There was an administration granted to Elizabeth Shakespeare, widow, of
the estate of Roger Shakespeare, of Chesset Wood, in the parish of
Hampton-in-Arden, April 15, 1597.

John Shakespeare, of Knowle, Warwickshire, left to his eldest son,
Henry, L5, and to each of his children L5--John, Elizabeth, Henry,
Thomas; to his granddaughter, daughter of John, L5; his property he left
to his youngest son, John, 33 Charles II., September 30, 1681.[245] A
William Shakespeare,[246] of Knowle, is mentioned in 12 George II., as
"tenant to the precipe."

The will of Robert Shakespeare, of Wroxall, March 19, 1565, shows that
he had a son Nicolas, that another Nicolas owed him money, and that his
goods were prised by a William Shakespeare. John Shaksper, of Wroxall,
labourer, leaves his goods between his son Edward and his wife; mentions
his sister Alice, his brother Woodam's children, his cousin, Laurence
Shaxper, of Balsal, or Beausal, his brothers, William and Nicolas, and
his daughter, Alice Windmiles, December 15, 1574.

William Shakespeare, of Wroxall, husbandman, in his will, dated November
17, 1609, left legacies to brothers and sisters not named.

John Shakespere of Budbrooke, left his best suit to Nicolas Shakespeare;
to his father-in-law, Thomas Burbidge, his best boots; to Mary
Shakespeare, two shillings; to Isabel Poole, late servant to Nicolas
Shakespeare, ten shillings. Anne Burbage, now the wife of William
Shotteswell, sole executrix, December 28, 1642.[247] He was buried
December 30, 1642.[248]

Nicolas Shakespeare,[249] of Budbrooke,[250] being aged and weak, leaves
L4 to the poor; L10 to his mother-in-law, Penelope Parkes; L40 to his
brother-in-law, Richard Parkes; L10 to his cousin, Richard Naso; L10 to
William Sattlewell, of Packwood. Residue to his dear wife Marie, sole
executrix, October 23, 1655.

John Shakespeare,[251] yeoman, of Lapworth, made his will October 30,
1637; proved by his wife Dorothy 1638. He had no children, and his
nephew, John Twycross, came in for most of his possessions. He left his
brother Christopher sixpence a week. Christopher's son John, and his two
grandsons, John and Thomas, had each twenty shillings. There was another
brother not named, whose three sons, Edward, William and Thomas, and
three daughters were to have L3 6s. 8d. each. Edward's two sons had also
legacies. The testator also mentions his sister, Catharine Shotteswell,
Catharine, Elizabeth, Winifred, Humphrey, Thomas, and John Shakespeare.
Overseers, John Fetherston, of Packwood, Esq., and John Shaxpere, of
Ringwood. Dorothy Shakespeare left no will. Letters of administration
were granted to her nephew, Antony Robbins, July 13, 1655.[252] In the
table of benefactions in Lapworth Church (near Knowle) it is recorded
that John Shakespeare and John Twycross gave each two shillings a year
to the poor of Lapworth and Packwood. "Humphrey Shakespeare gave twenty
shillings to the poor of this parish, and the like to the poor of
Rowington, 1794."

Thomas Shakespeare, of Lapworth, fuller, February 21, 1655, desires to
be buried in Rowington. He leaves to his kinsman, Richard Shakespeare,
of Kenilworth, his implements and L5; to his kinsman, Thomas
Shakespeare, of Lapworth, L5; to his kinsman and godson, Thomas
Shakespeare, of Rowington, L5; to his kinsman, Richard Shakespeare, L6
13s. 4d.; to his kinswoman, Mary Shakespeare, L5; to his kinsman, John
Shakespeare, L5; to his brother William's son's daughter Elizabeth,
sixpence, if demanded; to the poor of Rowington, forty shillings. The
executrix was his kinswoman, Elizabeth Shakespeare, and the overseers,
Thomas Sly, of Lapworth, and his kinsman, Thomas Shakespeare, of
Whittlygate in Rowington; proved May 18, 1658.[253]

It may be seen that Rowington was the central source of most of these
Shakespeares. Besides those already mentioned, we may note that there
was a case of John Shakesper _versus_ William Skinner, farmer, of the
Church of Rowington; an answer of William Skinner to the Bill of
Complaint; a document relating to Thomas Shakespeare, of Rowington,
1571, marked "Skinner"; and another concerning John Shakespeare. John
Shaxper of Rowington's will was drawn up in 1574.[254] He left his
property called Madywattons, at Shrawley, to his son George, with
remainder to his daughter Annis, and L20 to his son Thomas. He left
legacies to his brothers Nicolas and Thomas and his Aunt Ley, the
midwife. His wife's name was Eleanor. His goods were prised at L8 6s.
8d. by Thomas and William Shaxper, among others. The will of Richard
Shakespere, of Rowington, November 13, 1613, which caused so much
heartburning, showed that his son William had a son John, and that his
son Richard had four sons (Thomas, William, Richard and John). Thomas
and John's children are not mentioned. Another will[255] in the same
year of Thomas Shakespeare, of Mowsly and Rowington, October 13, 1613,
mentions sons--John, Thomas and Richard; and daughters--Eleanor, Joan
and Annis. John had two sons--William and John. John Shakespeare de le
Hill, Rowington, made his will January 20, 1652; his wife was Mary; his
children, William, John, and Margaret Vernon.

The Shakespeares from the Register of Rowington, printed by Mr. Rylands,
are given in the notes.

In 1593 Thomas Shakespeare and Florence, his wife, with her sister,
Alice Grace, sued Thomas Grace[256] and John Harding for certain lands
not specified, settled by their father on them. Thomas Shackspeare, of
Rowington, was assessed for the subsidy of 1597.[257] Thomas Shaxper,
senior, of the same place, in 7 Jac. I., 1610. A survey of Crown lands
in Warwickshire, 4 Jac. I., 1607, in the Land Revenue Office shows
Thomas, George, Richard and John as holding property there. A Thomas
Shakespeare was presented in 1632.[258]

Thomas Shakespeare, of Rowington, _temp._ John Pickering, Lord Keeper,
and Maria, his wife, daughter and heir of William Mathews, deceased,
filed a bill in Chancery concerning various tenements in Hatton,
Shrawley, Rowington, Pinley and Clendon.[259] Hil., 16 Elizabeth, Hugo
Walford, Quer., and Thomas Shakspere and Marie, his wife, defendants,
concerning cottage and 5 acres of land in Norton Curlew. Easter, 20
James I., Thomas Shakespere, Quer., and John Hall and Joyce, his wife,
defendants, of 12 acres of land in Rowington, which were sold to the
said Thomas Shakespeare, 41 Elizabeth.[260] There was a license granted
to a Thomas Shakespeare, aged twenty-three, to pass beyond the sea, June
13, 1632, to the Low Countries, to serve as a soldier.[261] At a court
of the Queen's Majesty, Henrietta Maria, Thomas Shakespere paid a fine
of 6s. 8d. for admission to lands surrendered by himself, to himself and
others, 1647.

Among the manuscripts of the Free Library at Birmingham there remains a
fine, 7 Charles I., between Adrian Shakspere, Quer., and Thomas Green
and Anna, his wife, about land in old Fillongley; a bond for L40 of
Adrian Shakespere, of Meriden, yeoman; and another fine, Easter, 26
Charles II., between Thomas Brearley, gent., and Thomas Shakspeare,
gent.

There were Shakespeares also still at Baddesley Clinton. In the Diary of
Henry Ferrers of that place, we find him speak of "napkins received from
Henry Shakespeare, Nov. 4th, 1620"; of "Peeter Shakespeare, Nov. 5." "I
ow Shakespeare none, Nov. 6th." "Henry Shakespeare sent his boy for a
mark for his napkin. Nov. 12th, 1628-9." "Shakespeare of Kingswood, Feb.
4th." "Shakespeare of Rowth(?), Feb. 18." "John Shakespeare came hither
about his court."[262] This is the Henry Ferrers who wrote the Catalogue
of all the Noblemen and Gentlemen resident in Warwick in 1577-78.[263]

There is a tombstone on the walls of Rowington Church:

     "In memory of John Shakespeare, of Baddesley Clinton, and
     Mary his wife, who died, he, August 26, 1722, 61; she,
     September 3, 1722, 56.

     "They were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their
     deaths they were not divided."

There seems to have been a large number of Shakespeares in the town of
Warwick.

A John Shakespeare was assessed 1d. a week for relief of the poor, 1582,
in Market Place Ward, and a Thomas Shakespeare at the same time in West
Street Ward.[264]

In the inquisitions post-mortem of Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick, 32
Elizabeth, a Thomas Shackspere was one of the witnesses.

A Thomas Shakespeare had a grant from Mr. Henry Ferrers of two
messuages, one orchard, four gardens, and four acres of pasture in
Warwick for L80, Michaelmas, 39 Elizabeth, 1597.

There was a Thomas Shakespeare--probably the same--who married on June
21, 1598, Elizabeth Letherbarrow, daughter of the Mayor of Coventry. He
became Bailiff of Warwick November 1, 10 Jac. I., 1613. The only notice
of the name in the "Visitation of Warwickshire" in 1619 is that of
"Thomas Shakespeere, gent., one of the principal Aldermen of Warwick."

It is not clear whether or not he was the son of Thomas Shakespeare, the
shoemaker, who held land of the manor of Wroxall, and died in 1557,
leaving William, Thomas, John, and Joan, ux. Francis Ley.[265]

In Birmingham Registers there was a William, 1637, and an Anne
Shakespeare of Knowle, 1743.

More might be said of the Shakespeares of Coventry and Fillongley. There
is a tablet recording Shakespeare benefactions in Fillongley Church, and
many still bear the name among the neighbouring peasantry. But to
complete the pedigrees of the Warwickshire families, we must follow them
to other abodes.

FOOTNOTES:

[231] November 25, 1584, Stratford-on-Avon Register. Mr. R. B. Wheeler,
writing in the _Gentleman's Magazine_, September, 1816, takes for
granted the poet's father had three wives; a belief which Rowe also
held. See Reed's ed., vol. i., p. 136.

[232] "Ursula, daughter of John Shakespeare, bapt. March 11, 1588-89;
Humphrey, son of John Shakespeare, bapt. May 24, 1590; Philip, son of
John Shakespeare, bapt. September 21, 1591."--Stratford-on-Avon
Register.

"This Humphrey was ancestor to the George Shakespeare living in
Henley-in-Arden in 1864, and since in Wolverhampton." See French's
"Shakespeareana Genealogica."

[233] See "Rot. Claus.," 23 Elizabeth.

[234] See St. Nicholas' Churchwardens' Accounts, transcribed and printed
by Mr. Richard Savage, of Stratford-on-Avon. The register states: "1579.
July Sexto die huius mensis, sepultus fuit Gulielmus Shaxper, qui
demersus fuit in Rivulo aquae, qui vel vocatur Avona."

[235] A collection of thirty-five MSS. containing the name of
Shakespeare. Besides these of William, there are papers of Thomas
Shakespeare of Tamworth, 1679; Edward Shakespeare in the Manor of
Solihull, October 2, 1688, and in 1690; John Shakespeare, 1707, 1709,
1710, 1711, 1712; Widow Shakespeare, 1712-1714; Benjamin Shakespeare,
1713; Benjamin Shakespeare's Barne, 1714.

[236] Stratford-on-Avon Records.

[237] _Notes and Queries_, Third Series, xii., pp. 81 and 161, August 3,
1867, contains all the papers. A draft bill of their Chancery suit is
preserved among the miscellaneous documents of Stratford-on-Avon.

[238] See "MS. Episc., Worcester," and Halliwell-Phillipps, "Outlines,"
ii. 256.

[239] Dom. Ser., State Papers, James I., xv. 65, September 23, 1605.

[240] "Mr. Collier says we have intelligence regarding no other William
Shakespeare than the poet at that date" (French, "Shakespeareana
Genealogica," p. 526).

[241] Dom. Ser., State Papers, Car. I., Dxiv. II.

[242] "Hist. MS. Com. Rep.," Appendix II., Davenport MSS.

[243] French, "Shakespeareana Genealogica," p. 540.

[244] Communicated in full by the Rev. E. T. Codd to _Notes and
Queries_, Third Series, vol. viii., December, 1865, p. 185.

[245] Somerset House, 88 Drax, proved July, 1683.

[246] _Notes and Queries_, First Series, vol. xii., p. 123, August 18,
1855.

[247] Somerset House, 131 Fines.

[248] Budbrooke Registers.

[249] 7 St. John, and 168 Aylett, Somerset House.

[250] The name of Nicolas Shakespeare of Budbrooke appears in a Recusant
Roll of 16 Charles I.

[251] Somerset House, 51 Lee.

[252] Admin. 1654, f. 127, July 13.

[253] Lib. 7, 318, Wotten, Somerset House.

[254] Worcester Wills.

[255] Worcester Wills.

[256] Chancery Cases, S.s. 25.

[257] Subsidy Rolls, Warwick, 35 Elizabeth, 193/235, and 39 Elizabeth,
193/247, P.R.O.

[258] See Rowington Court Rolls, 65.

[259] Mr. Yeatman's "Gentle Shakespere," p. 146.

[260] Chancery Cases, S.s. II.

[261] Exchequer Q.R. licenses to Pass Beyond Seas, No. 17, June 13,
1632.

[262] Dr. Macray's Transcript, _Notes and Queries_, Seventh Series, v.,
190.

[263] Published in Nichols's "Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica,"
vol. viii., p. 298.

[264] See "Book of John Fisher," p. 81.

[265] A Jone Ley was buried in St. Nicholas, Warwick, the same year. The
administration of the goods of Mary Shakespeare, Warwick, was granted
1723.




CHAPTER XIII

SHAKESPEARES IN OTHER COUNTIES


The Warwickshire Shakespeares overflowed into the surrounding counties.
There were Shakespeares in Stafford,[266] Worcester,[267]
Gloucester,[268] Northampton,[269] Leicester,[270] Berkshire[271] and
Oxford.

The three latter are worth noting. In 1597 there resided at Lutterworth,
only a few miles from Stratford, a Thomas Shakespeare, who was employed
by William Glover, of Hillenden, in Northamptonshire, gent., as his
agent to receive and give an acquittance for a considerable sum of
money.[272] It is not clear whether it was this same person or a son who
was the Thomas Shakespeare, gent., of Staple Inn, Middlesex, who
presented a certificate to some unnamed court, October 12, 1604,
accounting for his non-appearance in a case.[273] John Perkyns was the
plaintiff; Thomas Shakespere, William Perkyns, William Teery and others,
defendants. He had been summoned at the suit of Perkyns to appear, in
the Octaves of Trinity, but he had been required to be seventy miles out
of London on the Saturday of the Octaves of Trinity in a Chancery Case.
He only rested on the Sabbath at home, started on the Monday, and
appeared in court on Wednesday. The other defendants were allowed the
explanation; that it was denied to him seemed to be of malice. I cannot
find the decision. I searched the Lay Subsidies of Leicester,[3] in
Lutterworth and elsewhere, for this Shakespeare in vain; but I find that
in 1594 a William Perkins paid in bond for Richard Perkins in Wigston
Parva.[274] A bond of Thomas Shakespeare, of Lutterworth, November 27,
1606, to James Whitelocke for 26s. 8d., is mentioned in the Historical
MSS. Com.[275] A letter addressed to the Mayor of Leicester by certain
leading inhabitants of Lutterworth about the plague is signed first by
Thomas Shakespeare,[276] and Mr. French found in the Admission Books of
Staple Inn,[277] "Thomas Shakespeare, of Lutterworth, in Com. Leic.,
gent., etc., 15th Feb., 5 Jac. I., 1607." Does the following entry refer
to him or to Thomas Shakespere of Warwick? "John, son of Thomas
Shakespeare, gent., baptized July 18th, 1619."[278]

John Shakespear (1774-1858),[279] Orientalist, was born at Lount, near
Ashby, in Leicestershire, son of a small farmer there. He became
Professor of Hindustani, and gave L2,500 towards preserving the
birthplace at Stratford-on-Avon. He did not marry, and his property came
to his nephew, Charles Bowles, who took the surname of "Shakespeare."

A William Shakespeare was convicted at Leicester Assizes of
night-poaching.[280]

The Oxford Shakespeares deserve fuller attention than they have yet
received. The Saunders _alias_ Shakespeare, already mentioned,[281] was
possibly a native of another county. But we find some in the shire,
contemporary with the poet. Among the "Original Wills at Somerset House
there is one of Thomas Shackspeare, Innkeeper," in the suburbs of
Oxford. He wished to be buried in the Church of St. Giles, Oxford,
bequeathed property to his four children--Robert, Ellen, Mary, and
Elizabeth, L10 each when they came of age--and left his wife Elizabeth
residuary legatee and sole executrix; overseers, Mr. Ralf Shillingworth
and Henry Hedges. A remembrance was left to the preacher of his funeral
sermon, and to his loving friend Mr. Harris, of Yarnton, and he "set his
hand and seale thereto," May 27, 1642;[282] witnesses, Thomas Champe and
Nathaniel Harris. It is curious that the seal used should represent a
winged heart bleeding, surmounted by a ducal coronet.

Curiously enough, a notice of this one family is preserved in _Notes and
Queries_,[283] though it is not mentioned in the index. It was
transcribed from St. Mary Magdalene's, Oxford, by Dr. Macray while he
was yet curate. "Thomas Shakspere, the sonne of Thomas Shaxspere, was
baptised the 19th day of August, 1628;" Marie, April 15, 1630;
Elizabeth, June 29, 1632; "Robert, the sone of Thomas Shaxspere,
Inkeeper, was baptized September the 24th, 1634." Among the burials
appear, "Thomas, the son of Thomas Shaxespere, was buried Nov. 4th,
1642; Thomas Shaxsper, Inkeper, buried Nov. 11th, 1642; Ellinor Shaxsper
was buried May second, 1643." The earlier records of the Church are
lost. It is a pity the other Oxford registers have not been thoroughly
searched for the name, or printed.

A John Shakespeare,[284] of St. Mary's Hall, took the degree of B.A. in
1666. The _Oxford Chronicle_[285] of April 20, 1765, mentions a Richard
Shakespeare as being committed to Coventry Gaol as a forger.

Some of these Shakespeares gravitated towards London. In the will of
Leonard Wilmot, of Clanfield, co. Oxon., gent., 1608, there is a bequest
to "Leonard Shackspire, my godson, servant to John Prince, of Abington,
Vintner, 5^li, and to John Shackspire, of Newnam, 5^li."[286] This John
may be father of Leonard, and may be the John referred to in the note.
"John Shakespeare, of Nuneham Courtney, co. Oxford, an old feeble man,
had been drinking in his house, 25th Nov., 1633."[287] A Leonard is
mentioned in the register of Sunningwell, Berks, as being married to
Alyce Parkes of Abingdon, September 12, 1614. This is probably the
Leonard of Isleworth, Middlesex, vintner, who at an advanced age made
his will,[288] March 26, 1664. He left his wife Elizabeth two tenements
in Isleworth for life, then to his son John and his heirs; to his son
William, 12d.; to his son Ralph, 12d.; to his daughter, Elizabeth King,
L20 after his wife's death; to his son William's son William, 2s. 6d.;
to his daughter Elizabeth, a feather bed; to his daughter Sara, 12d.; to
his daughter Robina, 12d.; if John died without heirs, the tenements to
go to his sons Ralph and William. His wife Elizabeth executrix; his
friend, Mr. William Dance, and his son-in-law, Robert Parsons,
overseers. Was it a stepmother's influence that made him cut off his two
sons with a shilling?[289]

Working for another purpose at a later date, I found Shakespeares in the
little village of South Stoke in Oxfordshire. Among the baptisms are:
"John, April 8th, 1751; Mary, Oct. 22nd, 1752; Hannah, Sept. 29, 1754;
Elizabeth, Aug. 24th, 1756; Ann, July 6th, 1760, all children of Robert
and Mary Shakespeare." "Susanna, base-born daughter of Catharine
Shakespeare, Dec. 24th, 1784." "Elizabeth, daughter of John Shakespeare,
and Eleanor his wife, Nov. 12, 1786." Among the marriages are "John Birt
and Mary Shakespeare, 7th December, 1773." Among the burials are
"William, March 13th, 1768," and "Robert, July 20th, 1786." In the same
volume are Richard and Thomas, sons of Richard Burbage, 1577 and 1579,
who both died in infancy, and there are many other Shakespearean names.

In counties still further from Warwickshire the name is also found, as
we may note in Hertfordshire, Derbyshire,[290] Hampshire, Surrey,
Bedfordshire. There was administration granted to Lucy Shakespear,
widow, of the goods of her deceased husband Thomas, of the town of
Hertford, October 10, 1626; and Luke Shakespear, of Layston, co. Herts,
fishmonger, made his will[291] May 7, 1707. His wife was Joyce, and he
had a sister and two brothers not named.

In Layston[292] Churchyard there are the tombs of "Mr. John Shakespeare,
late citizen and founder of London," 1732, and of "Henry Mond
Shakespear, Citizen and Loriner of London," 1784.

In Portsmouth, 1662, William Shakespeare was contractor for the old Gun
Wharf. A public-house, called Shakespeare's Head, is supposed to have
been the place where he paid his men.[293] On April 25, 1747, in St.
Gregory's by St. Paul's, were married "John Shakespeare of Portsea, and
Mary Higginson of St. James', Westminster." Joseph Champ and Martha Ham,
married at Portsmouth April 22, 1736, had John Shakespeare, of
Portsmouth, as one of their bondsmen; and George Poate and Anne Loch,
October 6, 1802, had Samuel Shakespeare one of their bondsmen.[294] The
London Shakespeares seem to have had a residence in Hampshire also, for
"Mrs. Shakespeare, widow of Alderman Shakespeare, of London, died at
Bramdean, co. Hants, aged 80, in March, 1807."[295]

Aubrey speaks of the wife of John Shakespeare, of Worplesdowne, in
Surrey, who made as good butter there as she ever did at Wroxall or
Bitteston. She was a North Wiltshire woman.[296] At Walton-upon-Thames,
Surrey, tombstones remind us of Matthew Shakespeare and George
Shakespeare, who died August 8, 1775; also of John Shakespeare, of
Weybridge, January 13, 1775; of William Shakespeare of this parish,
1783; and of George Shakespeare, architect, Oxford Street, London,
1797.[297]

On March 13, 1663, "William Shakespeare of Faucat was buried, and on
July 23, 1668, Ann Shackspere, daughter to Will Shackspear, was buried
in Toddington, co. Beds."[298]

There were Shakespeares also in Essex. Mr. Veley collects a few
particulars regarding them from the unregistered wills of the
Archdeaconry of Essex.[299] The oldest is that of Thomas Shakespeare,
priest, August 26, 1557. He leaves legacies to "8 priests of Jesus
Commons, wherein I now dwell," to sing masses, and something to the
maintenance of Jesus Commons, and to poor people, to the sisters of
Sion, the fathers of Sheen, the observant friars of Greenwich, the
Black-Friars of St. Bartholomew, Smithfield, the nuns of King's Langley,
and "to the parryshe church of Seynt Mildryd in Bred Streete in London,
towards the byeing of a pyxt or monstrat to carry the blyssyd Sacrament,
v^li. To my brother, Robert Shakespeare; my brother, Harry Wyllson; my
brother, John Cooke; my sister, Grace Starke; my sister, Jone
Shackspere: my sister, Cicely Richardson; to John Cooke, of Jesus
Commons; to Mother Agnes, of the Commons, and Goodwyfe Blower." The
strange thing about this will is that it seems to have been made by the
same Sir Thomas Shakespeare, clerk, whom I enter among the
pre-Shakespearean London Shakespeares in August 22, 1559.[300] His will
is preserved at Somerset House.[301]

The two years that intervened between the drafting of the two wills were
years of great import. Mary had died, Philip had vanished, and Elizabeth
was seated on the throne. Therefore it is not surprising that there are
fewer priestly legacies in the later will, that it mentions also fewer
relatives, and no brother Robert. But there are still sisters, Thomasine
Cook, Grace Storeton, Jone Shackspere, and a relative, Anne Wilson; and
the legacy to the Church of St. Mildred's, Bread Street, London.[302]
Mr. Veley does not know of this later will, which is the one that was
proved. He takes it for granted Thomas was an Essex man, though he lived
in London. He probably was so.

Mr. Veley also mentions a Joseph Shakespeare of Havering, who made his
will 1640. He had a brother Samuel, of Hornchurch, whose widow Susan
made her will in 1678; a Samuel, of Romford, her son, who married
Judith, had a daughter Ann, and died in 1707; a Thomas, of Hornchurch,
also son of Susan, who made his will in 1702; and a William, probably a
third brother, who married Susannah, was father to John of Rawreth, and
made his will March 2, 1723. John of Rawreth's goods were administered
by his daughter Judith, wife of Asser Vassall, 1731. Mr. Veley also
finds a John and Elizabeth mentioned, but unfortunately does not print
the contents of these other wills.

It may be noted that there is a considerable gap between the date of the
priest and his brother Robert and these later Shakespeares. I was glad
to find among the administrations at Somerset House[303] the name of
"Alice Shakespeare, Widow, of Ginge Margretting, Essex, 1581." She might
have been the widow of this Robert, and might also have been, at an
advanced age, the sister Alice Shakespeare mentioned in the will of
Francis Griffin, of Braybrook, 37 Henry VIII., who, Mr. Yeatman insists,
must have been the poet's grandmother. Francis Griffin remembers another
sister, _Agnes Crosmore_. The goods of this Alice Shakespeare were
administered by her sister, _Agnes Williams_, of Barking. I have made a
prolonged search among the Subsidy Rolls of Essex to locate this family.
Nowhere have I found the spelling of the name so varied, from
Shakesphere to Shakespurr, Saxper, and even Shaksby and Shucksby.
Cross-references prove these to be intended for the same name.[304] In 3
Jac. I., in Foulness, Essex, a Nicholas Saxper; in Rochford,[305] 21
Jac. I., John Shuxbye, and in Stambridge Magna, 4 Car. I., both Shakesby
and Shukesby. The Hearth Tax,[306] Essex, Car. II., mentions Samuel
Shexpere, and the Subsidy Rolls of 14 Car. II., Samuel Shaksper, of
Harold's Wood Ward. In 1666[307] there appear in the Hundred of Witham
Thomas Shakesby and Edward Shakesby, a Samuel Shakespeare of the North
End of Hornchurch, and a Samuel Shakespeare of Harold's Wood Ward.

In the Hundred of Chafford, William Shakespeare, gent., of Langdon
Hills, appears among the collectors of the subsidies. It is possible
there may have been many more of the name assessed; but some of the
Rolls are lost and many are decayed in various ways. I have searched
several of the outlying registers without success, but others have found
the name in Romford, Barking, Hornchurch, Rawreth, and Rochester.

In the county where we find an early notice of the family the name
occasionally appears. Mr. J. M. Cowper, Canterbury, tells us that
"Judith filia Leonardi Shakespeare was baptized Feb. 27, 1596-7, at
Warehorne, Kent."[308] The name does not occur again. In Rucking, Kent,
February 24, 1599, John, son of Reginald Shakespear, was baptized, and
on May 30, 1600, Reginald Shakespeare was buried.[309]

Mr. W. J. Lightfoot, the transcriber, says that he is acquainted with
several other neighbouring parishes, and that the name does _not_ occur
in their registers--a statement which, curiously enough, Mr. French
reproduces without the "not."

George Austin and Margaret Shakespeare, of Biddenden, Kent, widow, were
married July 26, 1639.[310]

In the North, where the early Shakespeares were attached to land, they
seem to have survived and spread, as may be seen from the directories of
Northern towns to-day.[311] Ireland, too, owns Shakespeares, possibly
descended from the Thomas of Youghal.

FOOTNOTES:

[266] _Notes and Queries_, Second Series, vi. 285; Third Series, viii.
33. "George, descendant of Humphrey," etc. Mr. Dickenson tells me there
are many of the name in the parish of Bredon.

[267] By fine levied Hil. 1655, Shakespere conveyed tenements in
Inckbarrow, Worcestershire, _Notes and Queries_, Second Series, vii.
336.

[268] There is the will of John Shakespeare, of Newington Bagpath, Cook,
among the Gloucester Wills, Index Library, and in "The Shakespeares of
Dursley," by John Henry Blount, we find James Shakespeare buried at
Bisley, March 13, 1570; Edward, son of John and Margery Shakespeare,
bapt. at Beverston, September 19, 1619. Thomas Shakespeare, weaver, was
married to Joan Turner at Dursley Church, March 3, 1677-78, and of their
children, Edward was bapt. July 1, 1681; Mary, 1682; Thomas, 1685; and
Mary, 1691. John Shakespeare was a mason in Dursley from 1704 to 1739;
and Thomas Shakespeare had a seat-place allotted him in 1739. Betty
Shakespeare received poor money from 1747 till 1754. Some still exist in
the adjoining parish of Newington Bagpath, and claim kindred with the
poet.

[269] Edward Shakespeare of Syresham, 1626-30; Thomas Shakespeare of
Litchborough, 1610-41 (Northamptonshire and Rutland Wills, Index
Library).

[270] _Notes and Queries_, First Series, vii. 405 and 546.

[271] A John Shakespeare of Finchhampstead, Berkshire, made his will in
1644. See Berkshire Wills.

[272] _Notes and Queries_, First Series, vii. 405 and 546.

[273] State Papers, Domestic Series, Jac. I., ix. 72.

[274] Lay Subsidies, Leicester, Goodlaxton, 39 Elizabeth, Wigston Parva,
134/235 and 134/254.

[275] Hist. Man. Com., vol. iii., Report 1872, p. 190.

[276] Ancient Records of Leicester, Trans. Lit. and Phil. Society, 1855,
and _Notes and Queries_, Third Series, v. 383.

[277] Admission Books, Staple Inn, vol. i., f. 58, and French,
"Shakespeareana Genealogica," 542.

[278] From the Register of St. Gregory by St. Paul's, London.

[279] "Dict. Nat. Biography."

[280] _Notes and Queries_, Fifth Series, viii. 386.

[281] See p. 15.

[282] Proved November 4, 1643, by his relict Elizabeth.

[283] _Notes and Queries_, Third Series, viii. 124.

[284] "Catalogue of Oxford Graduates," Clarendon Press.

[285] _Notes and Queries_, Second Series, xii. 469.

[286] French, "Shakspeareana Genealogica."

[287] _Notes and Queries_, Seventh Series, vi. 344. See "Liber Actorum,"
Bodleian Library.

[288] Somerset House, 88 Bruce, proved July 1, 1664.

[289] The Hearth Tax for Isleworth, 1666, 252/32, notes "Ralph
Shakespeare 2 hearths, Widow Shakespeare 1 hearth."

[290] Elizabeth Shakspere, of St. Werbergs, Derby, made her will 1558.
Pegge's "Collection for the History of Derbyshire" contains a sheet of
printed verses "on the death of the Rev. Mr. Shakespear" (Nichols's
"Col. Top. and Gen.," iii. 244).

[291] Wills of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury.

[292] See _Genealogical Magazine_, January, 1898.

[293] _Notes and Queries_, Fourth Series, iv. 275.

[294] Hampshire Marriage Licences.

[295] _Gentleman's Magazine_, vol. lxxvii., p. 280.

[296] Aubrey's "Natural History of Wiltshire," 1680.

[297] Manning and Bray's "Surrey," vol. ii.

[298] "Misc. Gen. et Herald.," Second Series, vol. ii. Register of
Toddington, co. Beds.

[299] See "The Shakespeares of Essex." by Augustus Charles Veley,
Registrar of the Archdeaconry of Essex, _Essex Archaeological Society's
Magazine_, vol. iii., p. 70, 1865.

[300] See my article in the _Athenaeum_, April 23, 1892, entitled
"Pre-Shakespearean London Shakespeares."

[301] 40 Chayney.

[302] Auditors' Patent Books, vol. vi., 1538-1553. Thomas Shakespeare,
formerly minister of Colebray, in the parish of St. Mildred's, in the
ward of Bread Street, London, on September 1, 2 Ed. VI., received a
patent for 100 shillings per annum. There is no absolute proof, but
every probability, that this is the same Sir Thomas Schaftespeyr
mentioned in the will of Joan Jons of Bristol, and other Bristol Wills.
See the abstract contained in the "Great Orphan Book," and Book of Wills
in Council House at Bristol, 1886, by the Rev. J. P. Wadley, Rector of
Naunton Beauchamp.

[303] Admin. Vicar-General's Books, No. 268, 1574-1583.

[304] Lay Subsidies, Essex, 111/575.

[305] Lay Subsidies, Essex, Rochford, 112/602, 112/634, 112/642.

[306] Subsidy Rolls, Chelmsford, Essex, 112/707, do. 112/708.

[307] Subsidy Rolls of several Hundreds in Essex, a paper book, 246/19.

[308] _Notes and Queries_, Third Series, vi. 324, and French,
"Shakespeareana Genealogica," p. 541.

[309] _Notes and Queries_, Third Series, vi. 324, and French,
"Shakespeareana Genealogica," p. 541. Mr. C. G. Dickenson tells me his
will is at Canterbury, v. 52, f. 36.

[310] Registers of Sutton Valence, Kent, kindly sent by a correspondent.

[311] "Misc. Gen. et Herald," New Series, i. 143.




CHAPTER XIV

LONDON SHAKESPEARES


By far the most interesting search can be made in London, that great
centre where congregate representatives of all the families and counties
of the kingdom.

It is strange that a William was one of the earliest recorded burials in
the registers of St. Margaret's, Westminster. "William Shakespeare was
buried April 30, 1539." A comparatively modern hand has written against
this the foolish scribble, "Query if this be the poet or not?" He may
have been in the service of the Court, but there are no signs that he
was a man of wealth. In the churchwardens' account[312] he was only
charged 2d. for the candles at his funeral, a common charge, but not for
great people. He may have been the son of the fifteenth-century William,
or of Peter of Southwark, and father or brother of Roger the royal
yeoman.

The discovery that _Shakespeare_ lived in St. Helen's Parish,
Bishopsgate, has been claimed for an American, though Hunter mentioned
in his "Life of Shakespeare," 1845, that in the Subsidy Rolls of London
a William Shakespeare was assessed in 1597 in that district.[313]

[Illustration: NORDEN'S MAP OF LONDON, 1593.

_Between pp. 142, 143._]

The entry is: "Affid. William Shakespeare on v^li goods,[314] assessed
xiii iiii^d." The "affid." affixed to it shows that the Shakespeare
named tried to avoid payment on some grounds. It has surprised many, and
satisfied others as suitable, that the poet should have lived in this
neighbourhood, near so many of his theatrical friends. But I do not
think it is certainly proved that it was our Shakespeare at all. Two
references of Collier seem to locate him in Southwark in 1596, and in
1609, near the site of the Globe Theatre. Several of the name lived near
Bishopsgate before and after his death.

John Scatcliffe, of St. Botolph's, Aldersgate, cook, bachelor,
twenty-four, and Mary Shakespeare, of the same, spinster, twenty-four,
at St. Botolph's, December 20, 1637;[315] in later years, Nathaniel[316]
Shaxspere and Elizabeth ----, widow, married August 18, 1663, in St.
Botolph's, Bishopsgate; Henry Shakespeare, of St. Botolph's,
Bishopsgate, bachelor (twenty-five), and Elizabeth Hartwell, of same,
spinster (twenty), her parents dead, with consent of her grandmother,
Elizabeth Gaye, of same, at St. Botolph's, March 26, 1663; William[317]
Winch and Abigail Shaxpere, married September 30, 1680; Francis Hill and
Saray Saxspere, September 28, 1682; John Shakespeare and Edith Murry,
married at St. Botolph's, Bishopsgate, January 2, 1699; William
Shakespear and Anna Maria Carter, both of this parish, July 9, 1733.

There was a Matthew Shakespere who, on February 5, 1566-67, married
Isabel Peele in Christ Church,[318] Newgate Street. She was probably
daughter of James Peele, Clerk of Christ's Hospital from 1562 to 1585,
and sister of George Peele,[319] the dramatist, educated in the Grammar
School there. They seem to have had a large family.[320] On January 18,
1569, Johanne, daughter of Matthew Shakespere, was baptized, and buried
on February 11. On March --, 1574, Francis, son of Matthew Shakespere,
baptized; on August 27, 1578, Jane; on April 7, 1583, Thomas. There was
also a Humphrey entered as son of _Hugh_ Shakespeare, August 5, 1571.
But as among the burials there appears "Humphrey, son of Matthew
Shackspere, Aug. 30, 1571," it would seem to be an error. Johanne,
daughter of Matthew Shackespere, was buried December 26, 1572, the
second of the name; Jayne, on September 5, 1577, the first of the name.
Robert, son of Matthew Shackspeare, was buried May 5, 1580. Besides
these were buried Francis Shakespeare, October 7, 1571, and Robert
Shakespeare, May 24, 1577. These might be grandfather and uncle of the
family, which might have reckoned a William among its members.

There was a Thomas Shakespeare, royal messenger, in 1572, payments to
whom I have found in the State Papers.[321] And in "Archaeologia" there
is printed his request for payment, in 1577, for carrying letters from
the Privy Council to the Bishop of London at Fulham, the Bishop of York
at Tower Hill, the Bishop of Chichester at Westminster, the Bishop of
Durham in Aldersgate Street, and to the Bishop of Worcester in St.
Paul's Churchyard.[322]

Mr. Hunter and many others supposed that at the time of the poet there
was only _one_ other of the name in London--John of St.
Martin's-in-the-Fields.

In the churchwardens' accounts there were found notices of a John
Shakespeare about 1605. Mr. French thinks that he might be the John, son
of Thomas, of Snitterfield.[323] I have worked through these books and
the registers, and have gleaned a good many scraps about him. He appears
there too early. John of Snitterfield was born in 1581-82. John of St.
Martin's, on January 22, 1589, was married[324] to Dorothea Dodde,
daughter of the Vestry Clerk (her sister Jane had, the year before,
married a Christopher Wren) of that parish; and on December 23, 1593, it
is to be supposed he had a daughter, "Maria Shakespeare," christened,
mentioned there, as is customary in that register, without the name of
her father.

In 1594 Mrs. Shakespeare's sister was staying with her, as among the
burials is entered, "Elizabeth Dod, from Shakespeares."

John[325] Shakespeare, "on the land side of the parish," in 1603,
contributed to the new casting of the bells five shillings, and in 1605
was one of the sidesmen. "Paid to John Shakespeare, one of the sidesmen,
that he laid out at the registers office for putting in the Recusants
Bills 3s. 4d." In 1609 "Dorithie Shakespeare" was buried, and her
expenses brought in to the churchwardens 32s. 2d., relatively a large
sum, as Sir Thomas Windebanck's funeral cost only 16s. In that same year
John contributed also ten shillings to the repair of the church. On June
20, 1613, the churchwardens "received from John Shakespeare, by the
hands of Edward Thickness, the sum of L10, given as a legacy by Mrs.
Dimbleby, deceased" (which suggests that he was her executor), and in
1617 they "gave to John Shakespeare's daughter 7s. 6d."--a curious
entry, which I cannot explain. She may have done some work for the
churchwardens, as they often employed women; it may have been a debt due
her father, a present on her marriage, or an aid in sudden poverty. The
death of a "John Shakespeare, a man," is noted in 1646, in apparent
poverty, as the funeral cost only 1s.--a different cost from that of
Mrs. Dorothy Shakespeare in 1608. I had thought it possible that this
sum represented only a fee for a burial in another parish, but I find
that theory is untenable. Whether the John of 1646 was the same as the
sidesman of 1605 or not, he was certainly buried in the parish. From the
vestry books I found many notices of John Shakespeare as contributing to
the expenses of the poor, first on the "waterside" of the parish, and
then on the "landside"; and I believed, reasoning from a State Paper
Bill, that he was referred to in the entry, "received for a pewe, from
the Princes' Bitmaker 30s., 1639-40." His name disappeared from the
books long before 1646; and I fancied he had gone farther east to the
parish of St. Clement's Danes, which joined that of St. Martin's at
several points. "Paid to William Wright for a stone engraved with
letters on it, which is sett in the wall of the Earl of Salisbury at his
house at Ivie Bridge to devide the two parishes of St. Martin's in the
Fields and St. Clement's Danes in that place." I gave up theorizing
until I could see the registers of St. Clement's Danes, and from various
causes three years passed before I had an opportunity of clearing up the
puzzle. These registers prove that in London, as in Stratford-on-Avon, I
had been confused by double entries, and that there was _another John
Shakespeare_. The St. Martin's John lost his wife Dorothy in 1608; the
St. Clement's John married his wife Mary in 1605. "3rd Feb. 1604-5,
Johne Shakspear and Mary Godtheridg." _He_ was the wealthy bitmaker to
the King, of whom I had discovered notices in the State Papers and wills
that turned my attention to St. Clement's Danes, a hitherto unsuspected
locality for Shakespeare finds. I thought at first that he might have
been John the shoemaker who vanished from Stratford. But it was hardly
likely that he should have changed his trade from shoemaking to
bitmaking, or that he would have been successful in it. The St.
Clement's John might have been a son of the St. Martin's John, but there
is no christening of a John in that parish, or in any other London
parish that I know. So here I thought I might justly theorize, and state
my opinion that he really was the John, son of Thomas, of Snitterfield,
born 1581-82, of whom is no record of further life or burial in his own
neighbourhood. He would be of a suitable age, and there was in his case
a _reason_ for Court success.

William Shakespeare the poet had by this time made his mark, not only in
literature and the drama, but in Court influence and financial
possibilities. His patron, the Earl of Southampton, was in favour with
the King. Supposing this John was Shakespeare's first cousin, as I
believe he was, what more likely than that the poet, who had lost his
only son, would help, as far as he could, his nearest male relative? I
trust to find further proof of this some day, but I may state what I do
know about this St. Clement's John. He had a large family. The registers
record in the baptizings: "John Shaxbee sonne of John 28th Aug. 1605."
"Susan Shasper daughter of John 19th Feb. 1607." "Jane Shakespeer the
daughter of John 16th July 1608." "Anthony Shaksbye son of John 23rd
June 1610." "Thomas Shackspeer son of John 30th June 1611." "Ellyn
Shakspear the daughter of John 5th May 1614." "Katharine Shakspeare
daughter of John 25th Aug. 1616." Now, to set against these we have the
burials of: "Anthony Shakesby the son of John 26th June 1610." "Thomas
Shakspeer the son of John 1st July 1612." "Susan Shakspere daughter of
John 3rd Aug. 1612." "Katharine Shakespeare d. of John 26th Aug. 1616."
Of two of the remaining children, John and Ellen, we have further
information; concerning the other, I believe we have an interesting
error, bearing on the credibility of parish clerks.

Among the burials appears that of "_Jane Shackspeer, daughter of Willm,
8. Aug. 1609_." Now, this might have been a daughter of the Bishopsgate
William, or of some country William up in London for a holiday. It might
even have been a hitherto unknown daughter of the poet himself. But I
believe that the clerk's mind was wandering when he wrote, and that he
was thinking of "William" when he should have written "John," because
John's family seem to have been delicate and have chiefly died young,
and his daughter "Jane" would have been just about a year old at the
time. No other notice of "William" or of "Jane" appears in the register.

The phonetic varieties of the spelling of the name may have been
noticed, but it is as well I copied all such. Among the Bishop of
London's marriage[326] licenses I find on "May 28, 1631, John
Shackspeare of St. Clement's Danes, Bittmaker, Bachelor, 26, had a
license to marry Margaret Edwards of St. Bride's Spinster, 28, at same
Parish Church."[327] The age of John Shackspear coincides with the age
of John Shaxbee, which is the only resembling entry near the date, and
the trade and the parish are the same. He was duly married in St.
Bride's,[328] and soon afterwards christenings began in St. Clement's
Danes. "12th April 1632, John Shackspeare son of John Shackspeare
Junior, and Margaret, ux." "4th May 1633, Mary Shackespeare, daughter of
John Shackespeare, and Margaret, ux." "17th Aug. 1634, Mary Shackspeare,
daughter of John Shackespeare and Margaret, ux." "3rd March 1635-6 John
Shakespear son of John and Margaret his wife." The reason for the
repeated names lies in the burials: "John Shackspeare son of John 17th
May, 1632." "Mary Shakespeare daughter of John 16th Julie 1633." "Mary
Shakespeare, infant, 1st May 1635." The more important entry of the
burial of their grandfather is fortunately clear--"John Shackespeare,
the King's Bitmaker, 27th Jan. 1633."[329] The name of trade or
profession was but rarely mentioned in this parish, and in this case it
fixes the State Paper entries. A large sum (L1,612 11s.) due to her
husband by the Crown was paid to a widow Mary after the death of her
husband, John Shackespeare,[330] His Majesty's bit-maker, 1638, for
wares delivered to the royal stables, and she had already been paid L80.
"Warrant to pay to the Earl of Denbigh Master of the Wardrobe L1612, 11
0, to be paid to Mary Shackspeare widow & executrix of John
Shackespeare, his Majesty's Bitmaker deceased, in regard of her present
necessities, in full of a debt of L1692, 11 for sundry parcels of wares
by him delivered for his majesty's service in the Stables, as by a
certificate appeareth, whereof there has been already paid unto her L80.
Subscribed by order of the Lord Treasurer procured Dec. 18th, 1637, and
paid Jan. 21, 1637-8."

For some reason her daughter Ellen was made her heiress. Among the State
Papers at Dublin Castle relating to settlements and explanations after
the Restoration there is a reference to this lady, and there was some
dispute about what she was entitled to receive. "It appears by an order
of the Revenue side of the Exchequer[331] that Ellen, daughter and
heiress of Mary Shakespeare, of ye Strand, widow, was married to John
Milburne." In Mary Shakespeare's will, December 24, 1553, she left to
her daughter, Ellen Milburne, L60; money to her grandchildren Milburne;
L50 to her grandson, John Shakespeare, son of her son John; 10s. to her
sister, Anne Brewer; 5s. to her daughter-in-law, Margaret Shakespeare;
2s. 6d. to Sarah Richardson, her brother's daughter; and the same to
Mary Shakespeare, wife of Thomas Allon (proved March 2, 1654).[332]

The Mary Shakespeare of St. Martin's parish does not seem to have died
there. She may have been the Mary Shakespeare, wife of Thomas Allon, of
the above will, or the Mary Shakespeare who was buried in the Church of
St. Thomas Apostle,[333] November 14, 1644. There was a John
Shakespeare, who might have been one of those three now mentioned, or
who might have been a fourth of the name, not very far off, mentioned as
one of the defaulters by the Collectors of the Loan in the Hundred of
Edmonton, and part of the Hundred of Ossulton, County Middlesex, in
1627.[334]

There were Shakespeares further west and further east than the Strand.
Adrian Shakespeare, of St. James's, within the liberty of Westminster,
left L550 on trust with his brothers-in-law, William Gregory and William
Farron, for his daughter Elizabeth and an unborn child; his father,
Thomas Shakespeare, and all his brothers and sisters to have a guinea
apiece, residue to his wife Christian, November 26, 1714.[335] Perhaps
he descended from the William of 1539.

At St. George's, Hanover Square, William Fellows, widower, and Margaret
Shakespear, spinster, were married May 28, 1730;[336] at St. George's,
Hanover Square, William Guy and Rebekah Shakespeare, of St.
Mary-le-Bone, March 29, 1758;[337] at St. George's Chapel, Hyde Park
Corner, William Shakespeare and Mary Waight, of St. Giles, Cripplegate,
July 29, 1751;[338] James Barnet, of St. James's, Westminster, and
Elizabeth Shakespear, February 9, 1760.[339] A George Shakespeare, of
Westminster, Arm., matriculated at Wadham College, June 10, 1785, aged
twenty-seven.[340]

Manasses Shakespeare, of St. Andrew's, Holborn, widower, and Mary
Goodwin, spinster, of same, married at St. James's, Duke's Place, April
27, 1710.[341]

Benjamin Shakespear, of the parish of St. Christopher, painter, made his
will 1707, and bequeathed to his father, Benjamin Shakespear, of
Tamworth, in Warwickshire, his wearing apparel, and left a legacy to his
mother Joyce, his wife Judith being sole executrix[342] (proved December
4, 1714).

In the records of the Leather Sellers' Company is preserved the
apprenticeship of George, son of Thomas Shakespeare, of Arley, county
Warwick,[343] October 12, 1693. George, son of William Shakespeare, also
of Arley, was apprenticed 1732. Thomas Shakespeare, son of George,
citizen and leather-seller of London, was apprenticed to William
Jephson, vintner.[344]

An important branch of the family settled in the east. John Shackspeer,
of Rope Walk, Upper Shadwell, appears in 1654. His father has still to
be found, but his posterity believe he descended from the poet's
grandfather. I had hoped to satisfy them through the St. Clement's Danes
registers. But his age at his marriage precludes this, for it gives the
year of his birth as 1619. The only John that I know to be born in that
year was John, son of Thomas Shakespeare, gent., baptized July 18, 1619,
in St. Gregory by St. Paul's. I had taken him to be the son of Thomas,
the Staple Inn student and lawyer of Leicester, but I cannot prove it.
On June 14, 1654, John married Martha Seeley,[345] and had four sons and
four daughters, of whom survived Martha, Samuel, Benjamin, Mary, John
and Jonathan. A trade token of his still exists.[346] Ropemaker
Shakespeare was summoned, with others, to appear before the Admiralty
regarding a breach of contract for ropes, January 26, 1656-57.[347] John
Shakespear, son of John of Shadwell, ropemaker, was apprenticed to John
Grange, of Upper Shadwell, chafer, 1663-64.[348] Jonathan, the youngest
son, born February 6, 1670, succeeded his father, who died 1689. He
married,[349] April 26, 1698, Elizabeth Shallet, of Clapham, aged
nineteen, and had thirteen children. Samuel Wilton was apprenticed to
Jonathan Shakespeare, citizen and _broiderer_ of London, April 7, 1725.
He died 1735. The business of ropemaking was carried on by the eldest
son, Arthur, born 1699, who died 1749, leaving the property and business
to his youngest brother John, on condition he brought up his heir to
ropemaking. This John, twelfth child of Jonathan, born 1718, married,
1745, Elizabeth, daughter of Colin Currie, and Anne, daughter of the
Honourable John Campbell; and had eleven children. He became Ropemaker
to the Board of Ordnance in succession to his brother Arthur, May 12,
1749; Trustee of Middlesex Turnpike Roads 1751; Ranger of Waltham Forest
1761; Deputy-Lieutenant for Middlesex 1763; alderman of the ward of
Aldgate 1767; sheriff 1768. He was originally of the Broiderers'
Company, as was his father, but was translated from that guild to the
Ironmongers', of which he became master 1769.[350] He died 1775. "_The
alderman used the same coat of arms as the poet, there being but the one
known._" It is engraved in Noorthouck's "History of London," ed. 1773.

The Shakespear tomb in Stepney Churchyard records his death, and that of
Bennet Shakespear, son of Jonathan, 1756, and Jonathan, son of Jonathan,
1768, brothers of the alderman; also Mrs. Elizabeth Shakespeare, his
widow, February 15, 1807, aged eighty, at Bramdean, co. Hants; Arthur
Shakespear, eldest son of the alderman, M.P. for Richmond, in Yorkshire,
1818, aged seventy; his wife Jane, 1805, aged fifty-five; Matthew John
Shakespeare, son of Arthur, April 2, 1844; and several children who died
young. The sons of the Alderman John Shakespeare and Elizabeth his wife
were I. Arthur; II. John; III. David; IV. Samuel; V. Colin.

I. Arthur, the M.P. for Richmond, married Jane, daughter of Sir Matthew
Ridley, and had two sons, Matthew John, and Arthur William. His wife
died in Pall Mall in February, 1805,[351] and he died June 12, 1818, in
Albemarle Street,[352] aged seventy. His son, Matthew John Shakespeare,
willed away the Shadwell property to his cousins, the children of Mary
Oliver, 1844. The rope-factory was destroyed by fire in the autumn of
1860, but a street in the neighbourhood is still called Shakespeare's
Walk.

II. John. The second son of Alderman John was born May 6, 1749. He
married, in 1782, Mary, daughter and heir of the Rev. William Davenport,
of Bredon, co. Worcester, and of Lacock Abbey, co. Wilts, by his wife,
Martha Talbot, of the old family famed by Shakespeare the poet.

The sons of John Shakespear and Mary Davenport, his first wife, were:
(1) John Talbot; (2) William Oliver; (3) Henry Davenport; (4) Arthur.

1. John Talbot Shakespear entered the East India Company's service, and
had four sons by Emily, eldest daughter of William Makepeace Thackeray:
(1_a_) John Dowdeswell Shakespear, Lieutenant-Colonel of the Bengal
Artillery, who married Margaret, only daughter of Joseph Hodgson, F.R.S.
He died without issue, April 6, 1867, aged sixty.[353] (2_a_) William
Makepeace Shakespear, (3_a_) George Trant Shakespear, who both died
unmarried. (4_a_) Sir Richmond Campbell Shakespear, 1812-61, "youngest
son of John Talbot Shakespear, of the Bengal Civil Service. He came to
England with his cousin, William Makepeace Thackeray, for his education.
He served with distinction in India, was knighted in 1841, the only
occasion on which he returned to England. His cousin, Thackeray, in the
'Roundabout Papers' (Letts's Diary), paid a tribute to his chivalry and
liberality. He married Marian Sophia Thompson in 1844, and died at
Indore, October 28, 1861, leaving a family of three sons and six
daughters."[354] A memorial-stone is raised in memory of him in the
cloister walls of Charterhouse Chapel.[355] Thackeray drew the portrait
of Colonel Newcome from his elder brother, Colonel John Dowdeswell
Shakespeare. His eldest son, Richmond Shakespear, Captain H.M. 36th
Regiment N.I., died in India, August 12, 1865. His daughter, Selina,
married, in 1868, Lieutenant Ninian Lowis, Bengal Staff Corps.

Mr. John Talbot Shakespear had also four daughters--Emily, Augusta,
Charlotte, Marianne.

2. The second son of John Shakespear and Mary Davenport, William Oliver
Shakespear, was Judge of the Provincial Court of Appeal in the Madras
Presidency. He married Charlotte Maxton, and had five sons and two
daughters, (1_b_) William, who died young; (2_b_) Henry, a Lieutenant in
the Royal Navy, who was shipwrecked in a frigate in the Indian Seas,
1833; (3_b_) Charles Maxton Shakespear, Lieutenant-Colonel in the Madras
Army; (4_b_) Arthur Robert, who died in 1844; (5_b_) George Frederick
Shakespear, Lieutenant-Colonel Madras Staff Corps, who was married, and
had a son born in 1865.[356]

3. The third son, Henry Davenport Shakespear, was member of the Supreme
Court of India. He married Louisa Muerson, and had three sons and seven
daughters. (1_c_) Henry John Childe Shakespear, Commandant of the
Nagpore Irregular Horse; (2_c_) Alexander Shakespear, a Judge in India;
(3_c_) William Ross Shakespear, Madras Cavalry, who married Fanny
Isabella, daughter of Sir Robert North Collie Hamilton, of Alveston, co.
Warwick, 1854, and had two sons, William and Robert; he died in 1862.
The daughters of Henry Davenport Shakespear were Louisa, Harriet,
Augusta, Jane, Agnes, Mary, Henrietta. He died in 1838.

4. The fourth son of John Shakespear and Mary Davenport, Arthur
Shakespear, was Captain in the 10th Hussars, served as aide-de-camp to
Lord Combermore during the Peninsular War, and was Brigade-Major of the
Hussars at Waterloo. He married, April 19, 1818, Harriet Sophia,
daughter of Thomas Skip Dyott Bucknall, of Hampton Court. He died in
1845, leaving six sons and two daughters, (1_d_) George Bucknall
Shakespear, Colonel Royal Artillery, who married Henrietta Panet. His
eldest son was Arthur Bucknall Shakespear. (2_d_) William Powlett
Shakespear[357] was a Lieutenant in the 2nd Bombay Fusiliers, and lost
his life at Samanghur in trying to save a wounded sepoy. (3_d_) Colonel
John Talbot Shakespear, who married Emma Waterfield, and had a son,
Leslie, born 1865. (4_d_) Lieutenant-Colonel John Davenport Shakespear,
served in the Crimean War. He married, in 1855, Louisa Caroline,
daughter of Robert Sayer, of Sibton Park, co. Suffolk, and had a son,
Arthur Franklin Charles Shakespear, 1864, and a daughter, Ida Nea. He
claimed descent from the poet's family in 1864.[358] (5_d_) Rev. Wyndham
Arthur Shakespear, fifth son of Arthur Shakespear, of Boxwell, co.
Gloucester, Arm. Exeter College, matriculated May 29, 1855, aged
nineteen, B.A. from Litton Hall, 1860, and M.A. He has held various
curacies.[359] (6_d_) Robert Henry Shakespear, who married, in 1858,
Octavia, daughter of Charles Fenwick, Consul-General for Denmark. He has
a son, Lionel Fairfax Shakespear. His elder daughter, Harriet Blanche,
married, 1868, Lieutenant-Colonel James Edward Mayne, Deputy-Judge,
Madras; the younger, Rosaline, married William Sim Murray, M.D.,
surgeon, 66th Foot, 1867.

II. John Shakespeare's first wife, Mary Davenport, died in 1793; and he
married, secondly, Charlotte, the daughter of ---- Fletcher, Esq., by
whom he had a son--

5. Owen, who died unmarried, and two daughters, Georgiana and Henrietta
Matilda. His second wife, Charlotte, died in 1815, and he died January
16, 1825, and was buried at Lacock Abbey.

III. The alderman's third son, David, settled in Jamaica, and left a
family, whose descendants still exist there. In 1867 the Hon. John
Shakespear, grandson of David, was a member of the Legislature and
proprietor of Hodges-Penn, St. Elizabeth's parish.

IV. I have been unable to find particulars of Samuel, the fourth son.

V. Colin, the fifth son of the alderman, was in the East India Company's
Civil Service, as collector at Saharapore. He married Harriet Dawson,
and his daughter Harriet married William Woodcock, Esq.

The alderman's eldest daughter Sarah married Joseph Sage; his second
daughter, Anne, John Blagrove, of Cardiff Hall, Jamaica; his third,
Martha, the Rev. John William Lloyd, of Aston Hall, co. Salop; his
fourth, Mary, Laver Oliver, Esq., to whose children the rope-factory
descended.

Whatever may have been the fortunes of the other branches, it is very
clear that the chief modern Shakespeares have descended from the
Shadwell stock. John Shakespear, the second son of the Alderman, left a
memorandum declaring his belief that the family was derived from the
poet's grandfather. There has as yet, however, been found no proof of
any such connection, though it is perfectly possible that it existed. If
Richard, of Snitterfield, was the father of John, Henry, and Thomas,
there were two possible lines of descent. Henry may have had children
christened at other places than Snitterfield, whose descent no one has
traced. Thomas had a son John, born in 1581-82, clearly too old to have
been the first John of Shadwell. He _may_ have had a son of the proper
age; but, as I have stated above, I have found no John of the right age,
except John, son of Thomas.

A Hannah[360] Shakespeare, born 1777, is mentioned in the pedigree of
Esterby and Sootheran.

Henry Shakespear, of London, was a broker Loriner, 1775, connected with
Hertford (see p. 137).

On June 29, 1794, was baptized Joshua,[361] son of Thomas and Ann
Shakespeare.

A warm eulogy of the charity and virtues of William Shakespeare, Esq.,
of Hart Street, Bloomsbury, who died in January, 1799, aged
seventy-three, is given in the _Gentleman's Magazine_[362] of that date;
and in May of the same year the death is noticed, in Paddington, of
George Shakespeare, Esq., son of the late George Shakespeare, Esq., of
Walton-upon-Thames, and Pimlico, Middlesex.[363]

M. L. Jeny, in _L'Intermediaire_, March 25, 1889, states that "he had
read in _L'Abeille du Cher_ of Friday, November 18, 1836, that a poor
old man of seventy-seven, named George Shakspeare, was found dying with
cold and hunger in the middle of the frightful night of Wednesday
preceding, in Clarence Street, London, and was taken to the Hospital,
and died there. He was one of the poet's descendants."[364]

So late as November, 1880, there was a Mrs. Anne Shakespeare who died at
Brighton, aged 102.[365]

There are several American branches of Shakespeares, some of them
literary, and two of the name are settled in Vancouver's Island.[366]

Among the list of authors[367] we find the names of Alexander
Shakespear, on the "North-West Provinces of India," 1848; Edward
Shakespear, "A Book of Divinity," 1740; and Sophia Shakespear, 1753, a
biography; Henry Shakespear, "Province of Bengal," 1824, and "Wild
Sports of India," 1860; H. W. Shakespear's "Refutation of Mr. Tryon,"
1847; John Shakespear's Hindustani books; Emily Shakespeare's "Tennyson
Birthday Book," 1877; and Mrs. O. Shakespear, a novel, in 1895. Edward
O. Shakespeare, of Washington, U.S.A., has a medical work on
"Inflammation."

Mr. Russell French, from whose pages I have gleaned the bulk of the
facts concerning these modern Shakespeares, expatiates on the glories of
the later Shakespeare marriages. By the Currie alliance he traces back
descent to the royal Scottish families of the Bruces and the Stewarts;
by the Talbot alliance he traces back their pedigree to Edward I.; by
the Davenport alliance he again connects them with the Ardens, through
Sir Thomas Leighton and the eighth Lord Zouch, who married Joan,
daughter of Sir John Denham, by his wife Joan, daughter and heir of Sir
Richard Archer, who married Joan, the second daughter and coheir of
Giles de Arden, grandson of Sir Robert de Arden, the descendant of
Turchil; but these rather tend to glorify the modern branches than the
poet's name.

It were to be desired that there were more concerted study of registers
and other records concerning the name. Much more might thus be found,
and much of the energy now dissipated in futile searches might be
utilized in connecting the scattered links, because the study of
genealogy is the ancient form of the very modern inquiries into heredity
which interest so many followers of Mr. Francis Galton. It is after all
worth knowing who were the ancestors of William Shakespeare, what
heroic, chivalric, poetic, philosophic strains went to form the nature
of the perfect poet; and it is of mildly sentimental interest to us that
we should know whether any of his line is left on the earth. Of
sentimental interest, I say, for rarely, if ever, does genius repeat
itself, nor do different environing circumstances weld and mould genius
in the same way. Its nature is very easy to kill, or dwarf, or distort,
but it is our excuse for being concerned with those who bear the
honoured name.

In the unsatisfactory inquiries relating to Shakespeare's ancestors I
have exhausted all that I can find concerning his father's family; but
so much remains to be said concerning his mother's family, that in
consideration of the old proverb, "like mother, like son," it has seemed
to me worth incorporating into this volume some account of the Ardens.

FOOTNOTES:

[312] Churchwardens' Accounts of Thurston Amere and William Combes, from
June 8, 1538, to May 8, 1540, 48th week, 1st year.

[313] _Notes and Queries_, Seventh Series, vii. 483, June 22, 1889.
Compare Third Series, iii. 318; Third Series, viii. 418; Savage's
"Genealogical Dictionary of the First Settlers in New England," ii. 528;
John Timbs' "Curiosities of London," ed. 1855, p. 238, and ed. 1867, p.
297; "Annals of St. Helen's, Bishopsgate," 221, 322.

[314] Subsidy Rolls, London, Ward of Billingsgate and others, 39 Eliz.,
146/369, P.R.O.

[315] Marriage Licenses, Faculty Office, Harl. Publ.

[316] Bishop of London's Marriage Licenses, Harl. Publ.

[317] Register, St. James's, Clerkenwell.

[318] Registers of Christ Church, Newgate Street, Harl. Soc. Publ.

[319] He died 1598, and was at one time connected with the Theatre as
shareholder. _Notes and Queries_, Seventh Series, vii. 188.

[320] Registers of St. James's, Clerkenwell, Harl. Publ.

[321] Account of the Treasurer of the Chamber, 1572, _et seq._

[322] "Archaeologia," vol. xiii., appendix, p. 403.

[323] _Notes and Queries_, Seventh Series, ii. 247.

[324] Registers of St. Martin's-in-the-Fields.

[325] Churchwarden's Accounts, St. Martin's-in-the-Fields.

[326] Bishop of London's Licenses, Harl. Soc. Publ.

[327] Registers of the Church of St. Bride's.

[328] Registers of the Church of St. Bride's.

[329] Among the expenses of the Royal Household are entered: 1621--"To
John Shakespeare for one gilt bit for the sadle aforesayd L3 13s.
6d. To John Shakespeare for fourteen bittes, guilt silvered and
chased, at L5 10s. a peice. For one payre of bosses, richly enamelled,
52s. 6d_, L73 12s. 6d. For 7 bittes for the sadles aforesayd at
52s. 6d. each, L18 7s. 6d."--"Early Illustrations of
Shakespeare," published by the Shakespeare Society.

[330] State Papers, Dom. Ser., Car. I., ccclxxiv. 20, Docquet.

[331] State Papers, Irish, Dublin Castle, Vol. M., p. 338. _Notes and
Queries_, First Series, vi. 289, 495.

[332] Somerset House, 268, Aylett.

[333] The Registers of St. Thomas Apostle, London.

[334] State Papers, Dom. Ser., Car. I., lxxvi. 41.

[335] Somerset House, 249, Aston.

[336] Lic. Fac. Office, Harl. Publ.

[337] Reg. of St. George's, Hanover Square.

[338] Marriage Licenses, Bishop of London, Harl. Publ.

[339] Bishop of London's Licenses, Harl. Publ.

[340] Foster's "Alumni Oxonienses."

[341] Bishop of London's Mar. Lic., Harl. Publ.

[342] Somerset House, 248, Aston.

[343] _Notes and Queries_, Third Series, vii. 175.

[344] "Book of Apprentices," 1666-1736, f. 756

[345] His son stated that he was seventy-seven at the time of his death,
in 1689, but his marriage certificate makes him younger. "Publications
and Marriages, 1654: John Shakespear, of Ratcliffe Highway, ropemaker,
aged thirty-five, and Martha Seeley, of Wapping Wall, mayde, nineteen
years. Married before John Waterton, Esquire, on ye 14th June. Richard
Mathews, Robert Connolly, witnesses" (French, 547). He might have been a
son of John, son of Thomas of Snitterfield, b. 1582.

[346] _Notes and Queries_ Second Series, x. 188, 402; Third Series, vii.
498.

[347] State Papers, Dom. Ser., 1656-57, Commonwealth, cliii., Nos. 55,
56.

[348] "Misc. Gen. et Herald.," Second Series, v., 371, and Merchant
Tailors' "Book of Apprentices."

[349] Bishop of London's Marriage Licenses, Harl. Publ.

[350] Herbert's "Twelve Livery Companies."

[351] _Gentleman's Magazine_, 1805.

[352] _Ibid._, 1818.

[353] French, 551, and _Times_, April, 1867.

[354] "Dict. Nat. Biog."

[355] Register of Charterhouse Chapel.

[356] French, p. 556.

[357] A writer in _Notes and Queries_, Sixth Series, i. 494, speaks of a
"large silver salver bearing a lion passant and a leopard's head
crowned. In the centre are the arms and crest of Shakespeare, and on an
escutcheon of pretence three stags' heads caboshed. It bears the
inscription, 'William Powlett Powlett, Esq., D.D. William Powlett
Shakspear, 1821.' There is a legend this was made from plate owned by
the poet. What is the date of the salver?"

[358] _Times_, June 13, 1864, and _Notes and Queries_, Third Series,
vii. 498.

[359] Foster's "Alumni Oxonienses."

[360] "Misc. Gen. et Herald.," New Series, i., p. 143.

[361] Register of St. Bartholomew the Less.

[362] _Gentleman's Magazine_, vol. lxix., p. 83.

[363] Manning and Bray's "Surrey," vol. ii., under Walton-upon-Thames,
mentions the tomb of Matthew Shakespear and of George, aged fifteen,
August 8, 1775; John Shakespear, of Weybridge, January 3, 1775, aged
sixty-seven; William, January 23, 1783, aged seventy-seven; also of
George Shakespear of Oxford Street, London, late of this parish,
architect, who died March 29, 1797, in the seventy-fourth year of his
age.

[364] _Notes and Queries_, Seventh Series, viii. 89.

[365] _Ibid._, Sixth Series, ii. 53.

[366] _Ibid._, Third Series, ix. 346, 398.

[367] British Museum Catalogues.




_PART II_




CHAPTER I

THE PARK HALL ARDENS

    "No Saint George was born in England:
      He was but an Eastern saint;
    And the Dragon never vexed him,
      As the later legends paint.

    "But our Saint was born in Berkshire,
      And to Warwick linked his name;
    'Twas _Saint Guy_ who killed the Dragon--
      Quenched the Giant Colbrand's fame."--C. C. S.


Few families in the country have a descent so nationally interesting as
that of the Ardens. Great Norman families who "came in with the
Conqueror" are numerous enough, but there are few that claim to be
"merely English," and have such a record to show. The fables that have
grown around the memory of the hero do not invalidate the pedigree.
Rohand was Earl of Warwick in the days of King Alfred and King Edward
the Elder, when the title was an official one, not necessarily
hereditary, save of the King's will. Rohand was a great warrior, and was
enriched with great possessions. He dwelt in the Royal Castle of
Warwick,[368] said by Rous to have been founded by the British King
Cymbeline, enlarged by his son Guiderius, and repaired by Ethelfleda,
daughter of King Alfred, the Lady of Mercia. Rohand had one fair
daughter and heir, Phillis, or Felicia, who demanded great proofs of
valour in her suitors. She at last consented to marry the famous hero
Guy, slayer of the Northern Dragon,[369] son of Siward, Baron of
Wallingford, whom the Welsh claim as British by descent. Dugdale[370]
says that in her right Guy became Earl of Warwick, though of course this
was only possible through the King's favour. Some difficulties are
brought forward by Mr. Pegge.[371] Some time after his marriage, says
the legend, Guy went on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and on his
return, in the third year of King Athelstan, 926, he found the kingdom
in great peril from an invasion of the Danes. They were, however, secure
in their faith in their champion, Colbrand the Giant, willing to leave
the issue to the result of a single contest between him and any of the
King's knights. King Athelstan's chief warriors were either dead or
abroad, and he mourned in his spirit. A vision revealed to him that he
must welcome at the gate of Winchester an unknown pilgrim as the
defender of the country. The King obeyed the vision in faith,
unwittingly welcomed Guy, and laid on him the responsibility of becoming
the national champion.

[Illustration: WARWICK CASTLE.

_To face p. 162._]

Footsore, half-starved, and far from young, the pilgrim required rest
before he dared prudently attack the Danish opponent. At the end of
three weeks, however, he triumphantly encountered the giant, and the
Danes kept their promise and retired. The pilgrim, who refused to reveal
his name or receive any reward, also departed. He found that his son and
heir, Raynborn, had been stolen away, and that his faithful servant
Heraud was abroad in search of him. Affected by the strange religious
notions of the day, he returned to Warwick, not to gladden the heart of
his sorrowing spouse, but to receive charity at her hands among other
poor men for three days, and then to retire to a hermitage at a cliff
near Warwick, since called Guy's Cliff. There he remained till his death
in 929, in the seventieth year of his age.[372] He sent a herdsman with
his wedding-ring to tell his wife of his death, bidding her come to him
and bury him properly, and she should shortly afterwards follow him. She
fulfilled his wishes, set her house in order, left her paternal
inheritance to her son Raynborn, and within a fortnight was laid beside
her ascetic hero.

Heraud succeeded in finding young Raynborn in Russia, to whom, on his
return, the grateful King Athelstan gave his beautiful daughter Leonetta
in marriage. He, too, seems to have been of a wandering disposition. He
died abroad, and lies buried in an island near the city of Venice. He
left a brave son, Wegeat, or Wigatus, at home to succeed him, who was
noted for his liberality to the Church, in which virtue, however, his
son and successor, Huve,[373] or Uva,[374] seems to have exceeded him.

Huve died about the beginning of the reign of King Edward the Martyr,
and Wolgeat, his son, succeeded him. In early life[375] he enjoyed the
special favour of King Ethelred, but was deprived, at least for a time,
of his honours and possessions about 1006. It was probably during the
disorganized state of the earldom, in consequence of his "evil courses,"
that the Danes ravaged it so frequently. Wigod, or Wigotus, his son, a
potent man and a great warrior, succeeded to the earldom, and enjoyed it
during the latter part of the reign of King Ethelred, and through the
reigns of King Edmund and the Danish Kings. He married Ermenhild, the
sister of the famous Leofric, Earl of Coventry and Leicester in the time
of Edward the Confessor. His son, Ailwin, Earl of Warwick, was
contemporary with King Edward the Confessor and William the Conqueror.
Turchil, son and heir[376] of Ailwin (Harleian MS., 853, says
"grandson"), was Earl at the Conquest. His first wife was the Countess
of Perche; his second, Leverunia, grand-daughter of Leofric. In the
Conqueror's Survey he is called _Vice-Comes_ rather than _Comes_, but
this seems to have arisen from the royal interest in the castle, and the
direct service he owed the King, though some authorities state that he
was under Leofric, Earl of Mercia. He fought with William against
Harold, and was ostensibly left in full possession of all his lands,
rights and privileges. He is called Turchil of Warwick by the Normans,
but Turchil of Eardene, or of the Woodland, by himself, being one of the
first to adopt the Norman habit of local names. In Domesday Book, begun
in the fourteenth year of the Conqueror, he is entered as in possession
of forty-nine manors in Warwickshire, among which were Curdworth,
Coughton, Rotley, Rodbourn, Compton (Winyate), Nuneaton. Warwick town
and castle were recorded as belonging to the King. He had but a
life-interest, however, his son, Siward, receiving none of them as his
heir, but by favour of the King.

The title of Earl of Warwick was given by William the Conqueror to Henry
de Novoborgo, or Newburgh, younger son of Roger de Bellomont, Earl of
Mellent, and William Rufus added to the gift the whole of Turchil's
lands, including even those given away by himself and his ancestors to
the Church. It was a hard lesson to friendly Saxon noblemen. A gloss of
justice, or at least of consideration, was shown in the marriage of
Henry de Novoborgo to Margaret, one of the daughters of Turchil, and
sister of Siward de Arderne.[377]

Turchil's sons were Siward de Ardena, Ralph of Hampton,[378] William,
and Peter the Monk of Thorney, by his first wife, and Osbert by his
second wife. Some of their lands were left to the Ardens by grace of the
Novoborgos, who became their overlords. These lands were gradually
diminished by devotion to the Church, by the increase of the family, and
division of the properties, though this was somewhat balanced by wealthy
marriages.

Siward by his wife Cecilia had a large family: Hugh de Rotley[379]
(dapifer or sewer to his kinsman William de Newburgh), Henry de Arden,
Joseph, Richard, Osbert, Galfridus, a monk of Coventry, Cecilia,
Felicia. Osbert, his stepbrother, was the father of Osbert, Philip,[380]
Peter de Arden, and Amicia, who became the wife of Peter de Bracebridge,
and the ancestress of the Bracebridges of Kingsbury, seat of the Mercian
Kings. Her brother Osbert had daughters only, Amabilia and Adeliza, who
left no children.

The main line was carried on by Henry de Arden, son of Siward, who
married Oliva, and whose eldest son and heir was Thomas de Arden, of
Curdworth (9 John). He had also William de Arden of Rodburn, Herbert,
and Letitia. Thomas de Arden married Eustachia, widow of Savaricius de
Malaleone, and had a son of his own name, Sir Thomas de Arden of Rotley
and Spratton, who took part with Simon de Montfort and the rebellious
Barons, 48 Henry III. This cost him dear. In 9 Edward I. he handed over,
either in sale, lease, or trust, his lands in Curdworth to Hugh de
Vienna; to the Knights Templars the interest he had in Riton; in 15
Edward I., to Nicholas de Eton the manor of Rotley, and to Thomas Arden
de Hanwell and Rose his wife, Pedimore, Curdworth, Norhull, Winworth,
Echenours, and Overton, and made a covenant with William de Beauchamp
and Maud, his wife, of all his fees throughout England.

It is not probable that Turchil, the last Saxon Earl of Warwick, bore
anything that might be strictly called armorial bearings. When the
heiress of the Novoborgos married into their family, the Beauchamps
added to their own the Newburgh arms. But they used them in a peculiar
way, as if they considered they were associated, not so much with the
family as with the earldom. Only the eldest sons bore the Chevron
chequy, the rest of the family bore the Beauchamp crosses crosslet. In
some such way the Ardens also seem to have made a similar distinction,
though in later times the meaning was occasionally forgotten, and the
usage became confused.

Drummond suggests that the Ardens might also have borne these arms to
suggest that they, too, had a claim to the earldom of Warwick. The arms
Thomas bore were Chequy or and azure, a chevron gules, which his
ancestors assumed to show they held their lands from the Earls of
Warwick, whose Chevron was Ermine on the like field.[381]

The descendants of William of Rodburne,[382] the second son of Henry de
Ardern, were more fortunate than their cousins. Thomas de Draiton was
the elder, and William de Rodburne the younger. Thomas married Lucia (6
John), and had Thomas de Arden of Hanwell, Sir Robert de Arderne de
Draiton, and Ralph.[383] Thomas,[384] who bore as arms Ermine a fesse
chequy, or and azure, as now borne, married Rose, daughter of Ralph de
Vernon, with whom he obtained the lordship of Hanwell. He was living in
1287, and had a son, Thomas, who presented to the church of Holdenby,
1334. This Thomas married Johanna de ---- (?), and had an only daughter,
Joan, who married Sir John Swynford. Ralph married Alicia de Bellocampo.

Sir Robert de Arderne de Draiton married Nichola,[385] widow of William
de Boutvilein. His son, Sir Giles, had a son, also Sir Giles. This
latter had an only daughter, Margaret, who married Ludovic Greville, and
carried Draiton into the possession of that Warwickshire family.

Ralph, son of Ralph, the second son of Thomas of Hanwell, married
Isabella, daughter of Anselm de Bromwich, and lived at Pedmore,
Warwickshire, 16 Edward II. In 17 Edward II. he was certified to be one
of the principal esquires in the county. His son, Sir John, was knighted
33 Edward III., and bore for his arms the same as his ancestor, Thomas
of Hanwell: Ermine, a fesse chequy or and az. He had only one daughter
and heir, Rose, who married Thomas Pakeson, afterwards an outlaw. To
John succeeded in Curdworth his brother Henry, whose wife was Elena, the
first to establish himself in Park Hall, which was confirmed to him by
Sir John de Botecourt, 47 Edward III., releasing him of all service,
save only of an annual red rose. He was devoted to Thomas de Beauchamp,
then Earl of Warwick, who granted him several other manors, also on
payment of a red rose. In 4 Richard II. his niece, Rose, released to him
her interest in Pedmore, Curdworth, Winworth, Sutton, and Norhull, of
her father's inheritance. Sir Henry bore the fesse chequy or and az.,
with three crescents for difference,[386] before his brother's death
(see Roll, Edward III., and arms in Lapworth Church). He left his son,
Sir Ralph, heir, who served under the Earl of Warwick at the siege of
Calais.

Ralph settled on his mother, Elena, for life, the manors of Wapenham and
Sulgrave, in Northamptonshire, with remainder to his brothers Geoffrey
and William. He married Sibilla (2 Henry V.), and left by her two sons,
Robert and Peter.[387] Robert was from the age of eight years a ward of
Joan Beauchamp, Lady of Bergavenny. He married Elizabeth, daughter and
heir of Richard de Clodeshall; was in the King's service, was Sheriff of
the County, and Knight of the Shire. He sided with the Yorkists in the
Wars of the Roses, was taken, attainted of high treason by James, Earl
of Wiltshire, and other judges appointed to try such cases, and was
condemned. He was executed on Saturday after the Feast of St. Laurence
the Martyr, 30 Henry VI. The custody of his lands was granted to Thomas
Littleton, Serjeant-at-Law, Thomas Greswold and John Gamell, Esquires.

Two years after his death his son Walter obtained the King's precept to
his escheator to hand over the lands of his mother's inheritance to him,
and shortly afterwards he secured his father's also. He married Eleanor,
daughter of John Hampden of Hampden, in Buckinghamshire, and appears in
the register of the Guild of Knowle, 1457, with his "wife Alianore." He
had a large family, each of them in some special point interesting to
the genealogist, and therefore worthy of some attention and of careful
detail. It must not be forgotten that his father's attainder and the
Wars of the Roses had temporarily crippled the resources of the family.

Walter Arden's will, July 31, 1502, is preserved at Somerset House,[388]
an interesting will in many ways. His eldest son and heir was John,
Esquire of the Body to Henry VII., who was to pay 20 marks for his
funeral. "Item. I will that my sonne Thomas have during his lief x marc,
which I have given him; and that my sonne Martyn have the manor of
Nafford during his lief, accordyng as I thereof made him astate yf it
canne be recorded, and yf not, thenne I will that the same Martyn and
every of my other sonnes, Robert, Henry and William have eche of them 5
marc by yere during eche of their lives, and that my feoffees of my
landes make eche of them a sufficient astate of londes & tenements to
the yerely value of 5 marc during every of their lives." He left his
wife, Eleanor, executrix, Edward Belknap and John Bracebridge, Squiers,
and John Boteler of Solihull, overseers, "Richard Slystre, Vicar of
Aston, John Charnell[389] & Thomas Ardern,[390] Squiers, witnesses."

Dugdale seems to have read the will, and is interested in the mortuary
bequest, but, curiously enough, supposes Martin to be older than Thomas.
Perhaps this error arose from the testator's desire to settle Natford
upon Martin. This does not seem to have been so settled. Martin had his
five marks, married an heiress, Margery East, settled at Euston, in
Oxfordshire, and appears in the Visitations there, associated with the
Easts and the Gibbons. Robert was the Arden made Yeoman of the King's
Chamber, a presumption made definite by Leland's[391] remark that "Arden
of the Court was younger brother to Sir John Arden, of Park Hall." On
February 22,[392] 17 Henry VII., he received a Royal Patent as Keeper of
the Park at Altcar, Lancashire; another, as Bailiff of Codmore,[393]
Derby, and Keeper of the Royal Park there; a third gave him Yoxall for
life,[394] apparently, however, for a payment of L42.

A Robert Arden, who had been Escheator to the Crown for Nottingham and
Derby under Henry VII., received a new patent 2 Henry VIII.[395] On June
28, 7 Henry VIII., order to cancel five recognizances amounting to L200;
one made by Robert Arderne, of Holme, co. Notts, may concern the same
gentleman.[396]

Henry seems to have died young. William settled at Hawnes,[397] in
Bedfordshire, bore as arms three cross-crosslets fitchee or, on a chief
of the second, a martlet for difference. He seems to have died before
his eldest brother. He married Elizabeth, daughter of John Francklin of
Thurley in County Bedford, and widow of George Thrale. His son Thomas
married Anne, daughter of Richard Bowles of Wallington and widow of
Thomas Gonnel. His daughter Joan married John Moore; his daughter
Elizabeth married John Lee of Harlington.

Thomas certainly survived Sir John, Henry, and possibly also William.
Sir John married Alice d. of Richard Bracebridge of Kingsbury, and died
in 1526. His will was drawn up on June 4 of that year.[398] After
various bequests to churches, he left some special heirlooms to his son
and heir, Thomas, to his son John an annuity from Natford of five marks
a year for life, with other land, and gifts to him, his wife, and _their
heirs_. "Item. I will that my brothers Thomas, Martin & Robert have
their fees during their lives." That is, it may be remembered, ten marks
for Thomas, and five marks each for the other two. "Item. I will that
Rauf Vale and Hugh Colyns[399] have their fees as they have had during
their lives." Bequests of furniture were left to "my daughter Geys
Braylys," "my daughter Katerine _Muklowe_,"[400] "my daughter Brown,"
"my daughter Margaret Kambur," "my sister Margaret Abell," "my sister
Alice Buklond," "my son Thomas Bralis." To Joane Hewes, Agnes Abell,
John Charnell, various remembrances, his son Thomas to be sole executor,
Sir John Willoughby overseer; witnesses, Martin Ardern, Robert Ardern,
Symon Broke, clerk; John Charnell, John Croke, Rauf Vale. The will was
proved June 27, 1526.

Where was Thomas, son of Walter, meanwhile? I have only been able to
find two of the name contemporary with the cadet of Park Hall. A Thomas
Arden of Saint Martin's Outwich, London, citizen and clothworker, on
November 29, 1549, drew up a short will,[401] leaving his wife, Agnes,
his sole heir and executrix, proved January, 1549. I endeavoured to
learn if by chance he had come from Warwickshire, but the
apprentice-books of the company do not begin early enough. There was a
commercial family of Ardens in London, of whom he more probably was a
member. The possibility of his being a Warwickshire man I thought worthy
of careful consideration, but have been able to bring no further facts
forward.

There was also a Thomas Arden of Long Itchington mentioned in the
Subsidy Lists, whose will is preserved at Lichfield.

The other Thomas Arden was settled at Wilmecote, in the parish of Aston
Cantlow, on lands formerly owned by the Beauchamps. There is no record
how he acquired them. Aston Cantlow[402] had been settled, with the
castle and Honour of Bergavenny, upon Sir William de Beauchamp, second
son to Thomas, Earl of Warwick. He died 12 Henry IV., and Richard
Beauchamp, Earl of Worcester, his son and heir, inherited all his lands.
Richard's daughter and heir, Elizabeth, married Sir Edward Neville, a
younger son to Ralph, Earl of Westmorland, who was forthwith summoned to
Parliament as Lord Bergavenny. Dugdale gives us the arms depicted on the
roof of the chancel of Aston Cantlow Church, three varieties: "Gules, a
fesse betwixt six cross-crosslets or" (Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick);
"Argent 6 cross-crosslets fichee Sable, upon a chief Azure two mullets
or" (Clinton, Earl of Huntingdon); "Argent, 3 cross-crosslets fichee
Sable upon a chief Azure a mullet and a Rose Or." But Dugdale does not
know the family this represents. Could it be a variety of the Ardens?

The Thomas Arden who resided here paid subsidy of 26s. 8d. on L10 land,
being one of the largest landholders in the parish. He bought certain
lands at Snitterfield on May 16, 16 Henry VII., associated with certain
gentlemen whose names are suggestive, as I have shown on page 28. John
Mayowe transferred his property to Robert Throgmorton, Armiger,[403]
afterwards knight, Thomas Trussell[404] of Billesley, Roger Reynolds of
Henley in Arden, William Wood of Woodhouse, Thomas Arden of Wilmecote,
and Robert Arden, the son of this Thomas Arden. We know that Robert
Throgmorton was an intimate friend of the Ardens of Park Hall, and his
association with Thomas of Wilmecote strengthens the supposition that
the latter was the son of Walter. We know that this Thomas was the
father of Robert Arden, who was the father of Mary, Shakespeare's
mother, and her six sisters. It does not seem unlikely he bore arms, and
was the Esquire witness of Walter Arden's will, _who has never been
located elsewhere_. If he bore arms, it is more than likely that, as a
younger son, they were derived from _the Beauchamps_, and might even
have been those found by Dugdale in the Aston Cantlow Church, where he
was buried. It is probable that Robert bore the cross-crosslets with a
difference, as did his contemporary, William Arden of Hawnes. We have at
least Glover's[405] testimony that among the arms of Warwickshire and
Bedfordshire are "Arden or Arderne gu, three cross-crosslets fitchee or;
on a chief of the second a martlet of the first. Crest, a plume of
feathers charged with a martlet or." When, therefore, John Shakespeare
made application to impale the arms of his wife in his new coat, it
might seem natural that the fesse chequy, arms of the head of the house,
should be struck out, and those substituted more customary for a younger
son, and probably borne by Thomas, his wife's grandfather, or by Robert
Arden, his wife's father.

Thomas Arden, the son of Sir John, succeeded to Park Hall and the other
family estates in 1526. He married Mary, daughter of Sir Thomas Andrew
of Charnelton, by whom he had a large family: William, the eldest;
Simon, the second; George, the third, slain at Boulogne; Thomas, a
student of law; and Edward. His daughter Jocosa, or Joyce, married
Richard Cade, of London (see visitation of Hertfordshire, 1634);
Elizabeth married--Beaupre, Cicely married Henry Shirley, Mary married
Francis Waferer.

William, the eldest son, died before his father. Simon, the second son
of Thomas of Park Hall, was a wonderful man, of whom there will be more
to say elsewhere. He was elected Sheriff of the County in 1569,
and bore, while in Warwickshire at least, the arms three
cross-crosslets[406] and a chief or, without a difference. Shortly after
that time he purchased the property of Longcroft, in the Manor of
Yoxall, Staffordshire, and his descendants bear the fesse chequy, and
are noted in another county history.

The will of William Arden does not seem to have been noted by the family
genealogists, probably because it was drawn up in London. The Calendar
at Somerset House enters it as "William Arden,[407] of St. Brigyde,
London, and Saltley,[408] Warwickshire," 7 July, 36 Henry VIII. Its
details shed much light on the fortunes of the family, especially in
relation to the other family wills. He had married Elizabeth, the
daughter of Edward Conway, of Arrow, and left two sons and eight
daughters. He desired to be buried in the "Parish Church of Saint
Brigyde in Fleet Street, within the suburbs of London," and left "to my
youngest sonne, Francis Arden, all my purchased land, which I purchased
of my grandfather's youngest son, John Arden, and another part lying
within the Lordship of Saltley.[409] Item, I bequeath to him the lease I
have taken of my Lord Ferris for 31 years, which also lyeth within the
Lordship of Budbrooke, so that he come to his full age, and during his
nonage, the profits thereof to be taken up by mine overseers to the use
of my daughters. If it happen the said Francis to dye without lawful
issue, then I will my eldest sonne and heire, Edward Arden, when he
cometh to his full age, to enjoy the said purchased land and lease to
his heires. Item, I bequeath to the said Francis L6 13s. 4d., to be payd
yearely during the term of his naturall life, by the hands of my eldest
sonne, Edward Arden, when he cometh to his lands. Item, I give unto my
eight daughters, Anne,[410] Ursuley, Brigid, Barbara, Joyce, Jane,
Urseley, and Fraunces Arden the whole rent that my ferme beareth me,"
etc. "I bequeath to my brother, Edward Arden, my black Satin cote." "I
bequeathe my long gowne eggyd with velvet to my father, Thomas Arden, in
recompense of the money which he lent me, whom I make the Overseer of
this my will, with my father-in-law, Edward Conway." Edward Arden, his
son and heir, was to be sole executor. The witnesses were: Christopher
Drey, Francis Waferer (his brother-in-law), and John Tayloure, Vicar of
St. Brigyde, and it was proved April 14, 1546, by John, afterwards Sir
John Conway, uncle of the heir.

William's father, Thomas, died in 5 Elizabeth, 1563. I have not traced
his will. Edward, son of William, succeeded him. This Edward had been
ward to Sir George Throckmorton, of Coughton (though his grandfather was
alive), and he married Mary, third daughter of Sir Robert Throckmorton.
Brodesley,[411] Dudston, and Hybarnes were delivered to him 7 Elizabeth,
and in 15 Elizabeth he was called upon to prove his title to Curdworth
and to Berewood[412] Hall, which had been given by Hugh Arden to the
Canons of Leicester (Henry II.), and after the Dissolution purchased by
his grandfather, Thomas, and uncle, Simon, for L272 10s., with a yearly
rent of 30s. 4d., and settled on William, 37 Henry VIII. Various
purchases of land are recorded in Coke's "Entries."[413] He impaled the
park of Minworth on the other side of the Tame, to add to that of his
own Park Hall.[414]

Edward seems to have been highly respected in his time, and was Sheriff
of the County in 1575.[415] But he had offended Leicester[416] by
refusing to wear his livery (as many of the gentlemen of the county were
proud to do) and by disapproving openly of his relations with the
Countess of Essex before her husband's death. Leicester waited his time.
Edward Arden's sons were Robert (who married Elizabeth, daughter of
Reginald Corbet, Justice of the Royal Pleas, about 1577), Thomas,
Francis. Of his daughters, Catherine married Sir Edward Devereux, of
Castle Bromwich; Margaret, John Somerville, of Edreston; Muriel, William
Charnells, of Snareston, Leicestershire; and Elizabeth, Simon
Shugborough, of Napton, co. Warwick.

Edward Arden bore the family arms: Ermine, a fesse chequy or and azure.
Crest: On a chapeau azure, turned up erm., a boar passant or. Motto:
_Quo me cunque vocat patriam._

He appointed Edmund Lingard to Curdworth Church, 1573.

Edward Arden was a temperate follower of the old faith; but his
son-in-law, John Somerville, an excitable youth, seemed to chafe under
the increasing oppression of the Catholic Church and its adherents.[417]
The evil reports concerning the Queen and Leicester increased the
friction. Shut out from travel or active exercise, as all Catholics then
were by law, he studied and pondered, and his mind seemed to have given
way in his sleepless attempts to reconcile faith and practice. He
started off suddenly one morning before anyone was awake, attended only
by one boy, who soon left him, terrified; and when he reached a little
inn on the lonely road by Aynho on the Hill, he spoke frantically to all
who chose to hear that he was going to London to kill the Queen.[418]
Then followed arrest, examination before Justice D'Oyley, a march to
London with twelve guards,[419] examination in the Gatehouse,
imprisonment in the Tower. Thereafter went forth the mandate to arrest
Edward Arden, his wife, Francis Arden, of Pedmore, his brother,
Somerville's wife and sister, and the priest, Hugh Hall. Sir John
Conway, his wife's grand-uncle, was also commanded up to London, and
seems to have been confined for a time. Examinations, probably under
torture, followed fast on each other. John Somerville, Edward Arden, his
wife and brother, and the priest, Hugh Hall, were tried, found guilty,
and condemned to the traitor's death. Hugh Hall is said to have turned
Queen's evidence, but I have found no proof of it. Somerville and Arden
were carried forth from the Tower on December 19, 1583, to Newgate, in
preparation for their execution on the morrow; Somerville was found two
hours afterwards strangled in his cell; Edward Arden suffered the full
penalty of the law December 20, 1583.[420] Robert of Leicester had his
revenge. Mrs. Arden and Francis[421] seem to have suffered a term of
imprisonment, and then to have been released.

This first noble victim of the tyrannical Royal Commission was praised
by all the writers of his time, and pitied by all Europe. Burleigh lived
to be ashamed of his part in his death; and in his "Life" one can still
read in the index "On the Case of Arden" an explanation which has been
excised from the text.

It is more than probable that the active part that Sir Thomas Lucy took
in his arrest told more on the fortunes and feelings of young
Shakespeare than the fabulous deer-stealing story. The touching tragedy,
to which Froude has given but little attention or study, is given in
full detail in the State Papers. The _traitor's_ lands, of course, fell
to the Queen, and were granted to Edward Darcy.[422] But Robert
Arden,[423] "who was a prudent person" (doubtless fortified by his
brother-in-law's interest, and his own knowledge of the law), by virtue
of an entail executed on his marriage got back by degrees most of his
father's lands. He found, however, every tree in his parks had been cut
down by Darcy, who seems to have been a difficult person to deal with,
as may be gathered from Simon Arden's petition (p. 185); this Robert
lived to a great age, dying on February 27, 1635. His son and heir, Sir
Henry, who had been born April, 1580, had predeceased him in 1616.[424]
He had married Dorothy, daughter of Basil Fielding, of Newnham, and had
one son, Robert, and four daughters. Robert seems to have been a
brilliant youth, but he died single at Oxford. In the Bodleian[425] are
some verses deploring his loss. His four sisters were his coheirs:
Elizabeth, wife of Sir William Pooley, of Boxsted, in Suffolk;
Goditha,[426] wife of Herbert Price; Dorothy, wife of Hervey Bagot;
Anne, wife of Sir Charles Adderley, of Lea.

In Worcestershire, near Stourbridge, there is a parish of Pedmore, and a
hall of the name that seems at one time to have belonged to the Ardens,
as well as the Pedmore Manor, near West Bromwich, Warwickshire. By the
kindness of Mr. W. Wickham King, now resident there, I am told that
"Mistress Joyce Arden" was buried there in 1557; Jane Ardern and Hugh
Hall were married in 1560; Alice Ardeney and Thomas Carter married 1578;
while John Arden, son of Mr. Robert and Mistress Elizabeth, was
christened there in 1578. Frances Arden and Edward Wale married 1658;
Arthur buried 1668, and Judith Arden, widow, 1682. The arms in the
church are those of the Park Hall Ardens, and "Mr. Robert" was the heir
of Edward (p. 41 and notes).

The Pakingtons of Worcester quarter Ermine on a fesse compone or, and
az. an annulet for Arden.

FOOTNOTES:

[368] Dugdale's "Warwickshire," 372; Drummond's "Noble British
Families"; "Guy of Warwick," ed. Zupitza, Early English Text Society,
etc.; Harl. MS., 1167, f. 57; "Dictionary of National Biography."

[369]

    "Guy of Warwick, I understand,
    Slew a dragon in Northumberland."

        Romance of Sir Bevis of Hampton.

    "In Warwick the truth ye shall see
    In arras wrought full craftily."

        Romance of Sir Guy.

    "Gy de Warwic ad a noun
    Qui occis le Dragoun."

        Legend round the Mazer Bowl, at Harbledon Hospital, Canterbury.

[370] "Warwickshire," p. 374; Drummond's "Noble British Families";
Leland's "Itin.," iv. 63; Heylin's "History of St. George," p. 63.

[371] Nichols's "Bibliotheca Topographica Britannica," iv. 29.

[372] Dugdale's "Warwickshire," 372-374; Drummond's "Noble British
Families"; Cox and Jones' "Popular Romances of the Middle Ages," pp. 63,
64, 297-319; Ward's "Catalogue of Romances in British Museum," i. 470.

[373] Dugdale's "Warwickshire," p. 373.

[374] Drummond's "Noble British Families," ii.

[375] Harleian MS., 853, ff. 113, 114.

[376] "Guthmund, Ailwin's second son, held Pakington under Turchil; his
son was Sir Harald de Arden, Lord of Upton" (French, "Shakespeareana
Genealogica," p. 432).

[377] According to Dugdale and Drummond; Harleian MS., 853, differs.

[378] Ralph and William are witnesses to a charter from Henry de Clinton
to Kenilworth Priory, Henry I. ("Monasticon," vi. 3).

[379] Hugh de Arden and Adela; William de Arden and Agnes were witness
to Henry's gifts ("Monasticon," v. 210-212).

[380] Philip, Osbert's second son, who took the name of Compton
(Drummond; Dugdale's, 'Warwickshire,' 549).

[381] Novoborgo: or and az., er. Thomas Arden de Rotley: or and az., gu.
A fesse betwixt 6 cross-crosslets or--Beauchamp. The Warwickshire
Visitation gives the coat of Sir Herald de Arden as three
cross-crosslets fitchee and a chief or. See Drummond, p. 5.

[382] Whalley's "Northampton," p. 464; Baker's "Northampton";
"Parliamentary Roll of Arms," 862. "Sire ... Ilm de Arderne ... de
ermyne a une fesse chekere dor e de aszure" (_Genealogist_, New Series,
xiii.). I do not know which William this refers to.

[383] He married Isabella, daughter of Sir Roger Mortimer of Chirk. She
afterwards married John Fitzalan (Berry's "Essex Genealogies").

[384] Dugdale's "Warwickshire," p. 927.

[385] "This lady seems to have married for a third time. Robert de
Wyckham sued Thomas Wake and Nicholaa, his wife, and Giles de Arderne
for the next presentation to the church of Swalclyve. Robert, father of
plaintiff, had given the advowson to John de Arderne, and John had
enfeoffed Robert de Wyckham and Elizabeth his wife. Nicholaa had been
married to Robert de Arderne" (_Genealogist_, New Series, ix.).

[386] See Visitation, 1619.

[387] Dugdale's "Warwickshire," p. 928; Harleian MS., 1992, f. 121, "The
Ancient Family of Arderne." Ralph died 8 Henry V.

[388] 17 Blamyr.

[389] Walter Arden's son-in-law.

[390] The decision of the residence of this Thomas would solve a knotty
question.

[391] Leland's "Itinerary," vi. 20. See also admin. of goods, granted to
his sister Alice Buklond and his nephew John, son of Sir John.

[392] Patent 17 Henry VII., February 22, second part, mem. 30.

[393] Same series, September 9, mem. 35.

[394] Patents 23 Henry VIII., September 24, first part, mem. 12.

[395] Pat. Henry VIII., p. 1, m. 16.

[396] Letters and Papers, Henry VIII., Gairdner.

[397] Bedfordshire Visitation, 1566. (See Glover.) There was in Edward
VI.'s reign a William Arderne, Clerk of the Market of Struton
Oskellyswade, Bedford (Est. of Office, Edward VI. to Elizabeth). And in
the accounts of the Treasurer of the Chamber there are mentioned among
the "Extraordinary Yeomen of the Guard, 1570," "William Arden and his
son Robert Arden."

[398] Somerset House, 8 Porch.

[399] The name Collins appears in connection with the Ardens in
Wiltshire also.

[400] See Visitation of Worcester, 1569: "Richard Muklowe of Hodon,
Worcestershire, married Katherine, daughter of John Arden." The
Gloucester Visitation records that Richard Cotton of Sedenton, married
Agnes, daughter of Sir John Arden of Park Hall, sister of Thomas.

[401] Commissary Wills, Somerset House, 31^a Clyffe.

[402] Dugdale's "Warwickshire."

[403] "Stratford-on-Avon Miscell. Papers," see p. 410, _Genealogical
Magazine_, 1897. He was also trustee in a settlement made by Sir John
Arden of Park Hall, in association with Sir Richard Empson and others.
See Petition of Simon Arden, p. 184.

[404] It is curious that in a will of Sir William Trussel of Cublesdon,
1379, there is a bequest mentioned as having been made to him by his
"cousin Sir Thomas d'Ardene" (Sir N. H. Nicolas, "Testamenta Vetusta,"
i. 107).

[405] Glover's "Heraldry," vol. ii., ed. 1780.

[406] Fuller's "Worthies."

[407] 7 Alen. Inquis. P.M. at Warwick, June 27, 37 Henry VIII., Edward,
son and heir, aged twelve.

[408] See Close Roll, 32 Henry VI., m. 11. Saltley came into the family
with Elizabeth Clodshalle (who married Robert Arden in the time of Henry
VI.), and remained in it till the death of Robert Arden, 1643, when it
fell to the share of his sister Anne.

[409] By some family arrangement, the old family seat of Pedmore seems
to have been settled on him, as he was always styled Francis Arden of
Pedmore.

[410] Anne married John Barnesley of Barnesley (see Visitation of
Worcester, 1569); Bridget, Hugh Massey; Barbara, Richard Neville, son of
the last Lord Latimer, and claimant of that title and the earldom of
Westmorland; Joyce, John Ladbrooke. Was this Jane Arden the lady of this
name who married into the Brownlow family about 1553? See Pedigree of
Brownlow.

[411] "Originalia et Memoranda." Lord Treasurer's side of the Exchequer,
Hilarii Recorda, 7 Elizabeth, Rot. 82.

[412] _Ibid._, Hilarii Recorda, 15 Elizabeth, Rot. 55.

[413] Coke's "Entries," f. 39_b_.

[414] In an account of the Grevilles, when the eldest son still resided
at Drayton, it is noted: "Though a great part of the Lands of Sir Giles
Arden came to Lewis Greville through his wife, yet there is one Arden at
this time in Warwickshire that is a man of three hundred marks land by
the yeare." Addit. MS., 5937, f. 88, British Museum.

[415] See "Liber Pacis," Eg. MS., 2345.

[416] Dugdale's "Warwickshire," 884, 927.

[417] See _Athenaeum_, Feb., 1896, p. 190, and my little volume on
"Shakespeare's Warwickshire Contemporaries" (Stratford-on-Avon Press),
p. 48.

[418] State Papers, Dom. Series, Elizabeth, clxiii., 21 _et seq._

[419] Accounts of Treasurer of the Chamber, 1583-84.

[420] Burke makes an extraordinary error in stating that Shakespeare's
mother was a daughter of Sir Edward Arden, of Park Hall ("Hist. Landed
Gentry," edition 1882, vol. i., p. 34). Now, Edward was never knighted,
and must have been born about the same year as Mary, daughter of Robert
Arden, who married John Shakespeare.

[421] The Accounts of the Wardens of the Tower mention Francis Arden's
board, up to June 24, 1585, and he sued shortly after for Pedmore, on
the death of Sir George Digby, to whom it had been granted (State
Papers, Dom. Series, Elizabeth, ccii., 40).

[422] State Papers, Dom. Series, Elizabeth, clxxi. 35; also Patents,
Elizabeth, 28, c. 10.

[423] Dugdale's "Warwickshire," 927. I find also several pensions
allowed by the Crown to a Robert Arden, early in James I. These may
refer to Robert of Park Hall (Book of Patents, xi. 212).

[424] Inventory of his property is at Lichfield, where also is that of
his wife, Lady Dorothy Arden, 1635-36, and will of his son, Robert
Arden.

[425] Ashmolean MSS., 36, f. 125: "Robert Arden, Colonel and Sheriff of
Warwickshire." An elegy upon his death in Oxford of small-pox, August
22, 1643: "Seeing these tapers and this solemn night," etc. Signed,
"Peter Halstead."

[426] She was a Lady of the Privy Chamber to the Queen-mother, and
survived her husband. See the burial of her daughter, Mrs. Henrietta
Maria Stanhope, October 23, 1674.




CHAPTER II

THE ARDENS OF LONGCROFT


This main line of Ardens having thus become extinct, we have to go back
some generations to find the younger branch that carried on the name.
Simon, the second son of the Thomas Arden who died in 1563, brother of
the William Arden who died 1546, and uncle of Edward Arden, who was
executed 1583, seems to have been an important man in his own day. He
was much trusted by his father and nephew, and was elected Sheriff of
Warwickshire in 1569, when he bore as arms three cross crosslets
fitchee, and a chief or.[427] His first wife was Margaret; his second
Christian,[428] widow of Thomas Bond, of Ward End. In a catalogue of all
the noblemen and gentlemen resident in Warwickshire, 1577-78, by Henry
Ferrers, of Baddesley, is mentioned Edward Arden, of Park Hall, and
Simon Arden, of Saltley, his uncle;[429] and in the Subsidy for
Warwickshire, 1581, he is mentioned as one of "those collecting, and not
assessed themselves."[430] During the first half of Elizabeth's reign he
purchased Longcroft, in the parish of Yoxall, Staffordshire, a property
that had previously been in the family. In 18 Elizabeth (1576) he found
one light horse for the royal service there, and paid to the Subsidy of
1590, 26s. 8d. for his lands at Yoxall, valued at L10.[431] He seems,
however, to have got into trouble in his old age. The draft of a
petition of his (_circa_ 1595-98) is preserved among the Longcroft
papers,[432] which is well worthy of being transcribed:

     "_To the most honourable the Lord High Treasurer of
     England._

     "The most humble petition of Simon Arden, of the age of 100
     years or thereabouts, praying your good Lordship's aid in
     his owld age against the great wrongs and oppressions
     offered by Edward Darcie, Esquire, one of the grooms of her
     Majestie's Privy Chamber.

     "As by the enclosed may plainlie apeare:

        {The Pedigree. John Arden had issue Thomas.

        {Thomas had issue William, Simon, George, Edward, Thomas.

        {William had issue Edward & Francis.

        {Edward had issue _vivens_ Robert.

     "The said John Arden did infeff John Kingsmel,
     Sergeant-at-Lawe, Sir Richard Empson, Sir Richard Knightley,
     Sir Robert Throgmorton,[433] Knights, and others, of the
     manor of Crudworth, and other lands in the county of
     Warwick, to divers uses; the said Thomas, being seized in
     fee, granted to me, and his said other sons, dyvers several
     annuities, being all the patrimony he provided for the same
     his younger sons. The said Thomas did afterwards make other
     assurances to the said William. The said annuities were paid
     unto all the said younger sons during their lives, and unto
     me till the attainder of Edward Arden. By which means the
     premises came into the hands of her Majestie, in what time
     that the same remained in her hands, by your Honor's order I
     was paid mine annuitie, being 20 marks by the year. And
     after that the same was granted to the said Edward Darcie,
     your Lordship did likewise very honorably apporcion how much
     thereof should be yearely paid unto me by the said Edward
     Darcie, and how much otherwise, according to which
     aporcionment the said Edward Darcy paid his part thereof
     unto me foure or five yeares, and about six yeares sithence
     denyd so to do, urging me with seutes in the Court of
     Requests, and in the Honourable Court of Exchequer Chamber,
     and at the Common Law. Also for the space of vi yeares now
     together seeking by this countenance to oppress me. The said
     Robert Arden payeth unto me the porcion of the said annuity
     apointed by your Lordship's order, or rather more thereof
     than he was charged with by your order, and I have desired
     but ye residew of Mr. Darcie. I have had judgment against
     him in the Common _Place_, he hath removed the record into
     the King's Bench by writ of Error; so yt by injunction out
     of the Court of the Exchequer Chamber to entertain time and
     delay me til death hath wholy interred my ancient bodie
     already more than half in grave, knowing, _Mors solvit
     omnia_, by my death my cause wil be remeadiless.

     "Be therefore so much, my good Lord, as to take my cause
     into your own hands, and for God's sake to end it. I protest
     mine adversary hath caused me to spend more then such an
     annuity is worth to purchase. Age wold have ease, which is
     expedicion in causes of suit and molestacion, and expedicion
     in justice is the most Honour that may be; which is no small
     part of your Honor's comendacion. Almighty God long preserve
     you in all felicity, that this Realm of England may more and
     more long take profit of your most wise and grave counsels."

Perhaps on his coming to Longcroft he found the old Arden arms there.
Before the grant to his grand-uncle Robert there had been Ardens in
Yoxall.[434] Certain it is that after that date they appear in Longcroft
Hall and in the parish church. The headship of the family fell to his
heirs in 1643. Simon's son[435] Ambrose[436] married Mary Wedgewood
1588, and died 1624. His son Humphrey[437] married Jane Rowbotham at
Marchington, December 1, 1630. Of his family, Henry married Catherine
Harper, but died without children, November 26, 1676; John, of Wisbeach,
married Anne, and died without heirs, April 2, 1709, aged 84;[438]
Humphrey, of Longcroft, who married the daughter of ---- Lassel, and
died January 31, 1705, aged 74. His daughters Elizabeth and Katharine
died unmarried. His son Henry married Anne Alcock, and died 1728, aged
63. Humphrey's son and heir, John, was born 1693, and died 1734, aged
40. He married, first, Anna Catherine Newton, and second, Anne, daughter
of the Rev. John Spateman, Rector of Yoxall, 1730. He was High Sheriff
of the County in 3 George II. His son, Henry Arden, of Longcroft,
married Alethea, daughter of Robert Cotton, Esq., of Worcester, and died
June 22, 1782. The full pedigree is given, and the monuments at Yoxall
are described in Shaw's "Staffordshire," and in French's "Shakespeareana
Genealogica." Descendants still survive in this country and the
Colonies.

FOOTNOTES:

[427] Fuller's "Worthies."

[428] Administration of goods of Christian Arden, wife of Simon, 1563
(Lichfield Wills).

[429] Nich., "Col. Top. et Gen.," vol. viii., p. 298.

[430] Lansdowne MS., xxx. 27, 30.

[431] Subsidy Rolls, Yoxall, 1590; Shaw's "Staffordshire," i., pp.
100-102 and 499; and Talbot Papers, Heralds' College, Dugdale p. 932.

[432] See also manuscript notes on the copy of Shaw's "Staffordshire,"
by Samuel Pipe Wolferstan, Esq., of Statfold, preserved in the British
Museum, p. 102.

[433] Note that this is the same man appointed trustee by Mary
Shakespeare's grandfather.

[434] "Nichola, d. of Geff de. Shenton, sued Joan, formerly wife of
Ralph de Anderne, of Yoxhale, for a messuage in Yoxhale" (De Banco,
Trin., 23 Ed. III.).

[435] His will proved 1625 at Lichfield. Simon's daughter Elizabeth
became second wife of Clement Fisher of Wincote, addressed by Sir Aston
Cokaine in verses alluding to Shakespeare (Dugdale's "Warwickshire,"
1140).

[436] Shaw's "Staffordshire," p. 102; MS. notes of the author, Brit.
Mus.

[437] Ambrose had another son Ambrose, whose family appears in the
registers of Barton:

    Frances, daughter of Ambrose Arden, bapt. February 19, 1631, buried June
    7, 1634.

    Humphrey, son of Ambrose Arden, bapt. November 2, 1634.

    Henry      "      "        "     "    October 7, 1637.

    Benjamin   "      "        "     "    July 19, 1642.

    John       "      "        "     "    September 3, 1643.

    William    "      "        "     "    January 8, 1647
      (buried Sept. 18, 1666).

    Robert Masson and Elizabeth Arden were married December 22, 1644.

    Ambrose Arden, gent., buried July 15, 1656.

[438] His father had been married twice; but this second Humphrey is the
son of Jane Rowbotham. See Registers of Marchington.




CHAPTER III

OTHER WARWICKSHIRE ARDENS


It would be interesting to know more of some of the other Warwickshire
Ardens, particularly those mentioned in the Register of the Guild of
Knowle, as some have suggested that Shakespeare's mother may have
descended from them:

"1460. John Arden and Agnes, his wife, of Longehychyngton.

"1504. Richard Arden and Margaret, his wife, and for the souls of John
and Johanna, their parentes, of Longeychyngton.

"1506. For the souls of John Arderne and his wife, of the same.

"... Richard Salway, and Estell his wife, and for the soul of John
Arderne.

"1512. Alicia Arderne, and for the soul of William."

On turning to the Subsidy Rolls to find any further notice of the Ardens
of Long Itchington, I found only the following: "14 and 15 Hen. VIII.
Co. Warr., Knighton Hundred, Bilton [the next parish to Long
Itchington].[439] Thomas Arderne, land, 4 marks, 2/6. Solks. Henry
Arderne in goods 40/- 4d." The latter is twice repeated.

In the same Guild Register appears as member:

"1496. Robert Arderne, Master of Arts, Rector of Lapworth."

He does not appear in the preserved pedigree, as Robert, the son of
Walter, who died 1502, was in the King's service. The Warden and
scholars of Merton College appointed Robert Ardern, Master of Arts, to
the Rectory of Lapworth, January 10, 1488. On the rood loft of the
church are the arms of Sir Henry Arden:[440] Ermine, a fesse chequy, or
and az., with a crescent for difference, arms, by some thought to be the
parson's.

Henry de Arden,[441] in the time of Henry II., had two sons: Thomas of
Curdworth[3] and William de Rodbourn.[442] The descent of Thomas we have
already noticed, as well as the descent of Thomas Arden, of Drayton,
elder son of William Arden de Rodbourn. The second son of William was
another William of Rodbourn, killed in 17 Henry III. He married Avisia,
daughter of Robert de Kyngeston, and had also a son, William of
Rodbourn, whose heir was William, who sold the manor in 1369.

Dugdale says that Little Grafton was called Arden's Grafton because it
was bought by William de Arden in 10 John. In 52 Henry III. William de
Arden was certified to hold it of the Earl of Warwick; but he
transferred it to Edward I. in exchange for Offord, near Aston Cantlowe,
in the parish of Wootten Wawen.

A seal used by William D'Arderne, clerk, of Offord, Warwickshire, is
preserved in the British Museum,[443] appended to a deed in which he and
John D'Arderne were concerned, 1366. It has a shield of arms, three
cross-crosslets fitchee, on a chief a lion passant, on the border: "S.
Nicholai de Ardena." I have not traced a Nicholas. But Nichola de Arden
presented John de Arden to Cotesbrook Church, Northampton, May, 1361
(see p. 195).

Among other charters in the same collection occur the seals of--

Thomas de Arderne, of Newton, co. Warwick, 1280-90, on a shield, a fesse
chequy Ardern, "Sigillum Secreti."[444]

Thomas de Arderne, Lord of Peddymore, co. Warwick, 1281, on a shield
chequy, a chevron, "Sig. Thome de Arderne."[445]

Thomas de Arderne, 1286, a shield chequy, a chevron, "S. Thome de
Arderne."[446]

William de Ardena de Hamtune (_i.e._, Hampton in Arden, Warwickshire)
used a seal with a pointed oval shield thereon, a lion rampant
contourne, _circa_1188-98.[447]

Dugdale says concerning Hampton in Ardern,[448] that it is not _quite_
certain that Ralph de Arderne was a son of Turchil.[449] He is mentioned
in 5 Stephen and in 33 Henry II. as a Justice Itinerant. Hampton in
Arden was not altogether his own, but his son Robert purchased it for
500 marks. Robert was a clergyman, Archdeacon of Lisiaux, in Normandy,
and gave his estate here to his brothers Peter and Roger. Peter became a
clerk also, and gave his share to Roger, whose sons were William de
Ardena, 5 Henry III.; Walter, a Clerk; Roger, a Clerk. William's
children were: Hugo de Ardena, a Justice of Assize, 35 Henry III.;
Oliva, who married Robert le Megre; and Hawisia, who married Richard
Peche. Hugh's sons were William and Richard. William sided with the
Montforts, was pardoned, but was soon after slain by Richard de l'Isle.
He left no family; his brother Richard was an idiot; and his estates
went to the heirs of his aunts, John Peche and William le Megre[450]
(Plea Rolls, Ed. I.).

There is so much confusion regarding the most distinguished of these
early Ardens, that I would like to examine his story more closely.
Dugdale, as I have already noted, is not absolutely certain that Ralph
de Ardern, of Hampton, was a son of Turchil, but believes it
sufficiently to put him in the pedigree. Yet he goes on to state that
this Ralph was a justice itinerant in various reigns. Now, it is not
only dates that make this impossible: Turchil had married, first, the
Countess of Perche, and, second, Leverunia; and Ralph de Arderne, of
Hampton, is given as of the first family. But the mother of Ralph the
justice was a De Bohun. I propose, therefore, tentatively, to consider
that the first Ralph de Hampton married a De Bohun, and hope to find the
records true of an eldest son Ralph, brother of Robert, the Archdeacon
of Lisiaux, of Peter the clerk, and of Roger of Hampton. This view is
supported by many facts, and it gives _time_. Ralph was at the height of
his power in 1188, the very date at which William de Ardene, of Hampton,
the son of Roger, draws up a deed and affixes his seal.[451] According
to Dugdale, this should be his grandson. The name of Ralph's son and
heir is Thomas, not Roger. It was very unusual for a noble family to
bring up the eldest son to the Church, and yet the Archdeacon of Lisiaux
is considered by Dugdale as the eldest son of Ralph, who gives up his
inheritance to his brothers. But if we find a Ralph to be the eldest
son, we can easily account for his giving up the Hampton in Arden home.
He had made his fortunes elsewhere. Ralph was in high favour with the
King,[452] Henry II., and had married Amabilia, daughter and coheir of
Ranulph de Glanville,[453] the great lawyer, author, statesman, soldier,
and crusader, who, while Sheriff of York, had made prisoner William the
Lion of Scotland, and laid the King of England under an obligation.
Ralph's mother was a daughter of Savaric FitzCana, and sister of Ralph,
Gelduin, and Savaric FitzSavaric. Ralph FitzSavaric having died without
heirs, on the death of his uncle Savaric, Franco, the son of Gelduin,
laid claim to his vast possessions in England and the fief of Bohun in
Normandy. It is believed that Gelduin had married within the forbidden
degrees, without dispensation, and that this was the reason that Ralph
de Arderne put forward his mother's claims. Henry II. decided in his
favour at a court at Caen in 1187. But on the accession of Richard I.,
Ralph fell into disgrace, ostensibly through some delay in rendering his
accounts at Westminster while Sheriff of Hereford, and Henry's decision
was reversed 1189.[454] But it was evidently a doubtful question. Franco
died in 1194, and when his son and heir Engelger came of age, 1198,
Ralph de Arderne revived his claim, which was settled by a compromise.
After the disturbances in Normandy, 1208, a new dispute arose between
Engelger, the son of Franco FitzSavaric, and Thomas, the son of Ralph
Arden, which ended in a new compromise.

The offices held by Ralph were numerous. He was Sheriff of Hereford
1184-89,[455] and also justice itinerant. He married a second wife in
1194, Agnes de la Mara, heiress of the Barony of Holgate in Shropshire,
after which he regained royal favour. He received a gift from the King
of land in Essex, for which he paid[456] L362 16s. 8d. He was made
custodian of the temporalities of Canterbury at the time of the troubles
there Bailiff of Pont-Audemar in Normandy, 1198; in 1202 attended King
John at La Suse in Anjou; in 1203 was sent on an embassy to Otho, King
of the Romans; in 1204 went to Flanders on the King's service. He was
said to have acted as justice at Shrewsbury, 1208, but Foss[457]
believes this was his grandson, and states that Coke says so. Ralph de
Arderne endowed the Priory of Butey, Sussex, founded by Ralph de
Glanville, with half the town of Bawdsey. He founded the Priory of
Shulbrede, near Midhurst, and endowed it with half a knight's fee in
Lavington. His son Thomas was engaged in a lawsuit[458] with his aunt
about the partition of his grandfather Glanville's property. "Thomas de
Ardern, et Radulphus filius Roberti ponunt loco suo Mag. Will. de Lecton
_versus_ Will. de Auberville et Matilda uxorem ejus," etc. There is no
mention of Thomas after 14 John, 1213. Lands in Hereford, Sussex, Essex,
and Yorkshire were known to have belonged to him, and many scattered
branches in later periods may represent his descendants. I have not
found his arms; were they the same as William de Ardern of Hampton's,
already referred to?

Though Shakespeareans are only concerned with the Ardens who remained in
their own county, genealogists are interested in the fortunes of the
whole family. A volume would be necessary for a complete account, and at
present I only attempt to collect and preserve the scattered facts I
have found in various printed and manuscript authorities.

It is too often taken for granted that individuals do not belong to a
family because their names do not appear in the pedigrees collected at
the Visitations. We know that the descendants of younger sons and
daughters are frequently omitted, and the sons and daughters themselves
occasionally ignored. For instance, the Sir Robert Arden who was
executed in the time of Henry VI., 1451, is stated[459] to have left
seven children, but the name of his heir, Walter, is alone preserved.
Such omissions are more likely to have occurred in earlier times. The
Ardens frequently held land in more counties than one, and thus may
appear in county histories as doubles; while their general use of common
Christian names at other times makes it difficult to separate recorded
incidents. Wills, inquisitions, and other records often strangely bring
into closer relationship individuals not known to be connected, and the
severe test of dates often separates those supposed to be near in blood.

The main line had estates in Northampton. Robert de Arden had a charter
of free warren in Wapenham and Sudborough.[460] In 7 Henry IV. Wapenham
was assigned as dower to Elena, widow of Sir Henry de Arden, by Ralph
his son, with remainder to Geoffrey de Arden, his brother (see p. 170).
After the death of Elena and Geoffrey it reverted to Ralph, and to
Robert, his son, who in 20 Henry VI. received the King's pardon for
alienating it without licence. The manor of Sulgrave[461] was sold by
the Traffords to Sir Henry Arden, and it remained in the family until
Sir Robert sold it in 20 Henry VI. Laurence Washington, Mayor of
Northampton 1538, had a grant of the dissolved priory of St. Andrews
there. On April 26, 1564, William Arderne of Sulgrave[462] left to his
sister Mary all the portion his father, Richard Arden,[463] had left
her, and all his own goods. He left a legacy to Robert,[464] son of
Laurence Washington, and Laurence was the overseer of his will. There is
preserved a bond by John Ardern, Laurence Washington, and others for
L100, July 4, 1587.

An Adam de Arden, clerk, was incumbent of Croughton 1218. Another Adam
was Rector of Thornhagh and Bolewyck 1336 and of Barby 1361. Nichola de
Arden presented John de Arden to Cotesbrook Church, May, 1361.
Thomas de Arderne was incumbent of Laxton, July 9, 1310, and of
Clopton-on-the-Wold, 1325. Robert de Ardern, clerk, is mentioned August
16, 1322. Thomas de Ardern, diac., was presented to Nether Heyford,
1455. Eustachia de Ardern, patron of Holdenby, 1263, presented Ralph de
Ardern, and Thomas, son of Thomas Ardern, of Hanwell, recognised as
co-patron Thomas Ardern, of Rotley.

FOOTNOTES:

[439] The will of Thomas Arden of Long Itchington was proved 1552, at
Lichfield. Sons, Edmund, William and Thomas, and six daughters.

[440] Dugdale, 926.

[441] Baker's "Northampton"; Whalley's "Northampton."

[442] Dugdale's "Warwickshire," 927.

[443] Add. Charters, 21, 492.

[444] Cotton MS. Charters, xxii. 15.

[445] Egerton Ch., 368.

[446] Brit. Mus., Ch. lxxxii. 15.

[447] Cott. Ch., xi. 36.

[448] Dugdale's "Warwickshire," 952.

[449] I think the dates show that there must have been two generations
of Ralphs. One appears in another county.

[450] See _Genealogist_, New Series, XIII.

[451] A lion rampant contourne. See Brit. Mus., Ch. lxxxii. 15.

[452] Nichols's "Herald and Genealogist," vi. 432, and vii. 299-311.

[453] Foss's "Lives of the Judges," i. 379. Campbell's "Lives of the
Chief Judges," i. 19.

[454] Pipe Roll, 1 Richard I., pp. 208 and 145, Charter, Richard I.,
signed at Gorron in Maine, March 31, 1190.

[455] Fuller's "Worthies of Hereford."

[456] Pipe Roll, Essex, 6 Richard I.

[457] Foss's "Lives of the Judges," i. 338.

[458] Coke, 8th Report, ii. 29, and Blomfield's "Norfolk," viii. 341.

[459] Harleian MS., Visitation of Warwickshire, 1167, f. 57.

[460] Concerning forest rights in Clyve, Northamptonshire, Gilbert de
Arden appeared for the Prior of Markyate, Cherchebikenhull, Kynesbury,
26 Edward I. (55, Inquis. P. M.).

William de la Zouch de Haryngworth enfeoffed Adam de Arderne and Simon
Ward in Boroughley Manor of the Honour of Peverel, Northampton; Eton,
Weston, Ing, Houghton Manors, Bedford; Calston Manor, Wilts; Totnes
Castle, Devon; Weston-in-Arden Manor, Wolfareshull, Foulkeshull, and
Kelpesham Manors, Warwick, probably as trustees, 33 Edward III. (79,
Inquis. P. M.).

[461] Whalley's "Northampton," i. 25, 263.

[462] 7, Crymes, Somerset House Wills.

[463] Of Whitfield, 29, Street, Somerset House.

[464] Robert's son Laurence sold Sulgrave, went to America, and became
the great-grandfather of George Washington.




CHAPTER IV

THE ARDENS OF CHESHIRE


In the Conqueror's time the Manor of Watford, Northamptonshire, was
recognised as belonging to Gilbert the Cooke, to whom his son Baldwin
succeeded. But the next owner was Eustace de Arden,[465] son of
Alexander and Agnes Arden, in the time of Henry II. The first Eustace,
born about 1140, was probably the Eustachius de Arderne who granted
Watford Church to the Abbey of St. James. His son, also named
Eustace,[466] died in 1213. The dower of his widow Hawisia was in
Watford and Silvesworth, and Ranulph III., Earl of Chester, became her
security that she would not marry again without license from the
King.[467] Her two sons were Eustace[468] and John de Arderne. Eustace
died in 4 Edward I., 1221, leaving a son Eustace. The line ended with
four daughters, coheiresses--Aveline, Mary, Jane, Elena, 1275. The arms
of Eustace were: Gules, on a chief argent, a label azure.[469] I have
wondered if the following entries concerned younger sons of this family:
"To Master William of Watford 50 marks for his expenses going as a
messenger to the King beyond the sea";[470] and, "Paid to William de
Watford, Keeper of the Queen's palfreys."[471]

John, the second son of the second Eustace and brother of the third,
received either an original grant, or the confirmation of a grant, from
the Earl of Chester of the Manor of Aldford, in Cheshire. He was
probably the son-in-law of the Richard de Aldford who preceded him.[472]
As the Earl of Chester was Hawisia's surety, he may have been her son
John's guardian. John afterwards granted part of this fee to Peter, the
Earl's clerk, and another part to Pulton and Chester Abbey. On November
28, 1213, he compounded with the King for his father's annual payment
for lands in Watford, and granted to Eustace, his brother, the lands he
had received there from his father. He executed this deed in Aldford,
August, 1216. In that year he received, as a Knight of Ranulph, Earl of
Chester, then in the Holy Land, a grant of the lands of Geoffrey de
Sautemaris. Sir Walkelyn, his son, succeeded him in or before 1237-38.
Through his wife, Agnes de Orreby, he acquired Elford, in Staffordshire,
with Alvanley, Upton, and other manors in Cheshire. He was frequently at
Court, as his attestations to various charters prove, about 41 Henry
III. In 1264-65 he granted the Manor of Alvanley to his eldest son, Sir
Peter, who succeeded to all the family estates on the death of his
father, about 1268. He bore arms based not on those of Eustace de
Watford, or on those of the Earl of Chester, from whom he held land, but
on those of William de Beauchamp, who had succeeded to the Earldom of
Warwick in 1257, as if to claim descent from the Warwickshire family.
His seal appears first in 17 Edward I. in a release to Sir John de
Orreby of a debt due.[473] It bore a shield with three crosses crosslet
pattees, a chief Arderne, with the motto, "Frange, lege tege." See also
the charters in the British Museum.[474] His son and heir by Margery,
his wife, was Sir John, who married Margaret, daughter of Griffin ap
Madoc, Lord of Bromfield, of royal Welsh extraction.[475]

Sir John de Arderne at the tournament at Stepney, 2 Edward II., in the
retinue of the Earl of Lancaster, bore "Gules, 10 crosses crosslet, and
a chief or."[476]

But it is said that after his marriage the Arden arms were temporarily
varied to gules, crusule or, and a chief or.[477]

In 9 Edward II. he purchased part of Haselover from Geoffrey
Salveyn.[478]

In that year the "Nomina de Villarum" gives the name of "Sir Henry de
Ardena" as Lord of Elford. John's name, however, is given in the list by
the Lieutenant of the Knights and men-at-arms of the county, 17 Edward
II., 1324; and he was one of the Knights summoned to attend the great
council at Westminster, 17 Edward II. John and Margaret had two
sons--John, who succeeded to Aldford, Alderley, Alvanley, and Elford, 19
Edward III., and Peter, afterwards of Over Alderley. John married,
first, Alice, daughter of Hugh de Venables, and had by her two sons,
John and Peter, and a daughter Margaret. His second wife was Joane,
daughter and heiress of Sir Richard de Stokeport, by whom he had no
issue; and his third wife was Ellen Wasteneys, by whom he had two sons,
Thomas and Walkelyn, born before marriage, and two daughters, Isabel,
wife of Sir Hugh Wrottesley, and Maud, wife of Robert Leigh, of
Adlington, and a son, born after marriage (about 1341), who evidently
died soon.

Then occurred an extraordinary hitch in the history of primogeniture.
His eldest son, John, had died without issue before his father. Peter,
the second son, and natural heir of his brother and father, then aged
twenty-four, on his father's death found by the inquisition[479] that he
died possessed of "no lands,"[480] all his vast possessions being
settled on himself and his wife Ellen only for life, and secured by a
deed of gift, in reversion to Thomas, the elder illegitimate son of
Ellen Wasteneys. By an appeal, however, to the courts, based on the
previous settlement on his great-grandfather, Peter, the legitimate heir
recovered Alvanley. He married Cicely,[481] daughter and heiress of Adam
de Bredbury, who inherited Hawarden from her father, and henceforward
Alvanley and Hawarden were the chief seats of the Cheshire Ardens. It is
evident, therefore, that the root-meaning of Hawarden, or Harden, has no
relation to the family name.

The favoured Thomas received Aldford, Etchells, and Nether Alderley,
Cheshire; and Elford, Staffordshire. He was knighted before 1359, and
died 1391. He married Katherine, daughter of Sir Richard Stafford,
heiress of Clifton Campvile, Pipe, Haselover, and Statfold, and was
buried in Elford Church, where his beautiful marble monument still
remains. He is represented in full knightly armour, wearing a rich
collar, with the letters "S.S." interwoven, his basinet bearing the
words "The Nazarene." His wife lies by his side, richly robed, and also
wearing a collar with "S. S." His son and heir, John, born at Elford,
March 12, 1369, was over twenty-one at his father's death,[482] 15
Richard II. He married Margaret Pilkington, and died in 1408, leaving no
male heir.[483] A large monument in memory of him in Elford Church is
almost decayed.

In his inquisition, his nearest male relatives are stated to be Robert
de Legh, of Adlington, aged forty, and Hugh de Wrottesley, aged eight.
His only daughter was Matilda, aged twelve, who was granted Alderley and
Etchells only. She married Thomas de Stanley.[484] John's widow,
Margaret, took for her second husband Sir Robert Babthorpe, and died
1423. Her Inquisition Post Mortem is very interesting. She died seized
of Nether Alderley only, which reverted to her daughter, Matilda
Stanley.

"The Prince of Wales as Earl of Chester _versus_ Margaret, formerly wife
of John, son of Thomas de Arderne, to determine the right to the manors
of Aldford, Alderdelegh, and Echells, the advowsons, and 10 marks a year
from the manor of Upton, in Wyrehale. It mentions that Thomas and
Walkelyn were illegitimate; but Walkelyn died _s.p._, and pleaded the
settlement" (Chester Pleas, 10 Henry IV., m. 9, _Genealogist_, New
Series, vol. xv.).

Another Chester Plea Roll records the suit of Richard, son of John de
Radcliff and Matilda his wife, against Isabella, formerly wife of John
de Legh, Chivalier, for land in Modberlegh, which John de Ardene gave to
John de Legh for his life, with remainder to John, son of John de Legh
and Matilda, daughter of John de Ardene, and to the heirs of the bodies
of John de Legh and Matilda (_Genealogist_, New Series, vol. xiii.).

Sir Thomas Arden and Sir John bore as arms the three crosses crosslet,
and the chief or, the same as the legitimate family.

Hugh, the son of Peter Arden, of Alvanley and Hawarden, carried on the
main line, and had full possession of his estates by 1372. He married
twice--first, Agnes Hulme, by whom he had Peter and Ralph;[485] and
second, Cicely de Hyde,[486] by whom he had John, who lived in the
service of the King. The seal of Peter, son of Hugh de Arderne, of
Macclesfield, co. Chester, 1372,[487] is preserved in the British
Museum, and bears three crosses crosslet and a chief Arderne. Old and
infirm, Hugh was granted exemption from military service in 1408.

Charles Arden, son of John, son of Peter, married Elizabeth Radcliffe in
Edward III.'s time, and through her inheritance became owner of
Timporley, and founded the Timporley branch of Ardens.

The pedigree of the family is given _in extenso_ in Drummond, Earwaker,
Ormerod, and the Visitations of Cheshire, so that it is unnecessary to
repeat it here. Further intermarriages with the Hydes[488] are recorded.
Ralph Ardern, of Harden, led his tenantry against the Royalists, 1642,
and died 1657. Sir John, head of the family, in 1660 was Sheriff of
Cheshire. One of his brothers was the Rev. James Arden, Dean of Chester,
1691.

John, who was Sheriff in 1760, married Sarah Pepper, who brought Pepper
Hall into the family. Their son, Richard Pepper Arden, Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, was created Baron Alvanley[489] 1801. He had three
sons, John, William, and Richard. The title became extinct 1857.[490]
The arms were the three crosses crosslet and a chief or; crest, a double
row of ostrich feathers out of a ducal coronet.

There is a curious will at Somerset House[491] (January 9, 1614) of
Thomas Arden, of Hornsey, gentleman, who seems to have been connected
with this family. After trifling legacies, he leaves his lease in
Cheshire of Melton Farm to his dear and well-beloved sister, Ann Ardern.
"Executors, my beloved sister Anne Arderen, ever faithful friend, and
Richard Drape of Hornsey gent."--proved January 17, 1614. But another
similar will of the same man was again proved, 1615, by Anne and another
co-executor.

In Berry's "Sussex Genealogies" we find that George Ardern, son of
George Ardern, born in Chester, came to Chichester, married Catharine,
daughter and coheir of Robert Palmer, Esq., and had three sons--George,
John, and Richard. Richard married Margaret, daughter of Thomas Green,
and had three sons and a daughter--Thomas, George, Richard, and
Catherine.

An important official Arden was John, who in the reign of Henry V. was
Clerk of the Works.[492] His patent was renewed under Henry VI., and
payments are recorded to him for making the tomb of King Henry V.[493]
in St. Peter's, Westminster, of Caen stone, L23 6s. 8d.; for repairs in
the Tower; in the palace of Westminster; and in the castle of
Wallingford. He was also Clerk of the Works at York, and in 22 Henry VI.
was made Baron of the Exchequer, and had various grants.

Foss believes him to be the father of Sir Peter Arderne,[494] also in
royal service. In 18 Henry VI. he was deputy of William de la Pole, Earl
of Suffolk, chief seneschal of the Duchy of Lancaster. He took the coif
February 14, 1443, and was made King's Serjeant and Chief Baron of the
Exchequer May 2, 1448. Dugdale does not mention him as a Judge of Common
Pleas, but he received his patent July 7, 26 Henry VI., and must have
held double office. In 1461 his patents were renewed, but in the
following year there was a new Chief Baron, though Sir Peter retained
his other offices. He had a tun of wine annually for life. His will[495]
is so interesting from a literary point of view, as well as a
genealogical one, that it is worthy of fuller notice. He and his wife
Katharine had founded a chantry in Netteswell, Essex, and a chapel in
the parish of Latton, Essex, where they resided. He left to these and
many other charitable purposes handsome legacies; and to his wife, Dame
Katharine, he left his "daily Primer," much plate and furniture, a
crucifix, the furniture of a chapel, his "book of legends in English,
and his English translation of 'Bonaventura de vita et passione
Christi.'" To his "son, John Bohun," armour, and his book in English of
"Boys de Consolacione Philosophiae, with the booke of Hunting therein."
To his daughter, Anne Bohun, furniture, and a French booke, "Giles de
Reginum Principii." To his daughter, Elizabeth Skreene,[496] furniture
and a mass-book. To his son, John Skreene, "myne owne volume of old
statutes with the Register, and ye new Lawes therein; my newe statutes
and a boke of termes of parchemyn, and a good boke compiled of Law with
a yallow leather covering, and a booke of law of termes of 2 Ed. II. in
parchemyn, a greate booke of gramer, with the Siege of Troy borded, a
greate booke called Catholicon borded, and a good new bounden fair
little book compiled of Assises." "To my ward, Thomas Bibbesworth, his
own marriage free to himself,[497] my best Register of Lawe, my owne
gret compiled booke of Lawe covered with red leather, and a horn upon it
... a booke of lawe in parchemyn compiled and bokeled, a boke of terms
of Law on paper, with A^o 32-A^o 39 and other yeares therein." "To my
niece, Margaret Newport, a table of ivory with the Salutation of our
Lady in ymages of silver. To my brother, Master Thomas Arden, my scarlet
gowne furred, my book flowered Barthm. his own booke of Lucerna,
conscience, his Sawter glosed, my booke of the Life of St. Thomas of
Canterbury." To his cousin, Master John Roclif, a hoode; to his brother,
parson of Hadham, a cloke; to his nephew, Guy Arden, a gowne. Other
remembrances follow. His interest in the forest of Galtuce, in
Yorkshire, in the towns of Hoby and Esmeswold, to be sold to pay his
debts. His wife to have all the residue if she remain unmarried. The
manors of Monkhall and Enfield to his wife, reverting to his daughters;
the manor of Swale in Godilston to his wife, and to any heir she
chooses. Executors: Dame Katherine Arden, his wife, and Master
Thomas[498] Ardern, his brother, and others, February 20, 1466, proved
July 10, 1467. A rubbing of the sepulchral brass in memory of Sir Peter
and his wife[499] at Latton is preserved in the British Museum. His arms
were: Or, three pellets azure on a chief gules, three lozenges
argent.[500] Bobbingworth Hall, Ongar, Essex,[501] was conveyed to
Richard Ardern 1423, and to Sir Peter Ardern 1446. In that year also
Gregory Wery released Latton Hall, Harlow Half Hundred, to Peter Ardern
and his heirs for ever.[502] The will of the Guy Arden,[503] nephew of
Sir Peter, was drawn up July 24, 1498. He left legacies to the master,
every brother, and every servant of St. John's College, Cambridge; to
Sir Christopher Wright, Fellow of St. John's, his journal; to Mr. Bowes,
of King's College, his great beads; to the Lady Prioress of Crabhouse,
"2 portuess of written hande and x^s, and to her convent 6^s 8^{d}." The
residue to Dr. William Robinson and Master John Basse, Bach. of Civill
Lawe.

A curious group of wills seem to prove that the Alice Green who married
John Holgrave, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, must have previously
married an Arden,[504] and had children by him. Sir John Holgrave's will
was drawn up on August 6, 1486.[505] After church bequests, he leaves to
his son Thomas some plate, "of the gift of Elizabeth Greene, my
mother-in-law," forty marks to his son John, and fifty marks to his
daughter Elizabeth. "To the brotherhood of the Clerkes of London, wher I
am a brother, 13/4." To Katherine Coleyn, 100^{s}; to Alice Green,
100^{s}; to _Richard Arden_, towards his learning, 10 marks, and one of
his best gowns; to Master Walter Ardern, parson of Cheyham, 100^{s}; the
residue to his wife Alice. Executors: Alice, his wife, Thomas Holgrave,
his son, Master Walter Arden, and Richard Ardern. If his sons and
daughters die without heirs, his estate to go to Richard Arden, his
son-in-law, and Master Walter Arden. His wife Alice made her will in
1487.[506] Her son Thomas was to have fifty marks, her son John L100,
and her daughter Besse L100. "Also to Richard, my son, 100 marc; to Mr.
Wat, my son, 100 marc; to Katerine, my daughter,[507] L40; to Elizabeth,
my daughter, 10 marc." "_Cousin Alice Skreene_"[508] was to have 10
marks also. There were gifts of plate to her sons Thomas and John and
daughter Besse, to Richard and Mr. Water, her sons, and her daughter
Katharine. Executors: My son Mr. Walter Ardern, my son Richard Ardern,
my son Thomas Holgrave. Overseers: Master Litton and my daughter
Katharine. Proved September 21, 1487.

The above-mentioned Master Walter Arden,[509] parson of Cheyham, Surrey,
September 13, 1482, left legacies to every household in his parish; and
10 marks each to Richard, my brother, to Thomas, my brother, to John, my
brother, to Elizabeth Ardern, my sister, to Elizabeth Holgrave, my
sister, to the daughters of my sister Collyns, and to various cousins.
Also to the daughters of Mr. Codyngton, and 10 marcs to poor scholars.
Twenty shillings to reparation of St. Mary's, Cambridge. The residue to
Richard Arden, my brother. Executors: John Deye, Sir John Norwood, and
John Codyngton, the younger, with 10 marks each. Proved October 2, 1492.

Seven years afterwards Richard Arden, of Bosham,[510] Sussex, and of
Bermondsey, left legacies to various churches, and to his brothers
Thomas and John Holgrave. Johane, his wife, sole heir and executor,[511]
with reversion to John Holgrave. Overseers: John of Lee, of Addyngton,
Richard Culpepper, of Ardyns Lee, and John Chaloner, Huwild, 1499.

The name "Collins" makes one think there may be some connection with the
following: Walter Arden,[512] of Hampton, in Highworth, Wilts, makes his
will on April 1, 1540. He leaves to Thomas Ardern, the elder son of my
brother, Richard Arden, L40 and farm stock; to Johane Arden, my servant,
sister to Thomas, L20; to Margaret Sewell, my daughter, L100 and all my
lands; to Elizabeth Palmer, my sister's daughter, and to other
grandchildren, money gifts. My daughter Elizabeth sole executrix; Simon
Yate supervisor.

The goods of Edith Arden, Hampton Turvil, Wilts, were administered in
1578, and those of Richard Arden, of Chilton, 1641.

John Arden,[513] of Hampton Turville, Highworth, Wilts, yeoman, August
16, 1585, leaves half his goods to his wife Amy as long as she is
unmarried, reversion to Thomas Arden, his son; to Editha Collyns, L6
13s. 4d.; to Agnes Collyns, 20s.; to Elizabeth Collyns, 20s.; to Walter
Arden, my godson, 10s.; to Elizabeth Arden, the daughter of my brother,
Henry Arden, a sheep; to each of the children of my brother Richard a
sheep. All the residue to my son, Thomas Arden, executor. Overseers,
brothers Thomas and Virgill Arden, who were also witnesses. Proved
November 28, 1585.

The will was proved of Thomas Arden, of Hampton Turvill, Highworth,
Wilts, yeoman, February 3, 1621. His wife Agnes to live in the house in
convenient rooms and have L10 a year, payable out of the manor of
Westthroppe, in the parish of Heynes; or, if she does not like her diet,
L20 a year. He stands possessed for a terme of 1,000 years in the moitie
and one-half part of one-fifth of the manor of Westthropp, to be given
to eldest son, Thomas Arden, and heirs male; if no heirs, to John Arden,
his second son; then to Edward Arden, his third son; to Nicholas Arden,
his fourth son, each of which are to have L100. To Henry Arden, my son,
L4 a year, and his dwelling in the house at Hampton and good usage
there, and if he does not like his treatment, to have L10 a year. To
John, my son, my tenements in Birdlip, Gloucester; to Edward, my son, a
house in Highworth and the Chantrey House. My kinsman, Thomas Arden, of
Fairford, Gloucester, oweth me L40. I give this to Agnes, my daughter,
wife of Henry Gearinge. Thomas, his son, sole executor. His loving
brother, Thomas Stratton, and Henry Gearing, overseers.[514]

The Ardernes of Cottesford and Kirtlington, Oxford, bore the same arms
as the Park Hall Ardens, with a mullet for difference;[515] but the
relationship is not given in the pedigree of the Visitation. It only
starts with Robert Arden of Cottesford, whose son William[516] married
Agnes Stotesby of Evenley, and he had, first, Thomas, second, John,
third, William, fourth, George. His daughter Alice married Thomas Thorne
of Northampton. Thomas predeceased his father and John succeeded, who
married, first, Isabel Woodward, widow of Richard Swillington, who bore
him a son, Leonard, who became a priest, and Eleanor, married to Anthony
Yate. John married, second, Isabell, daughter of John Gifford, of
Twyford, Bucks, by whom he had John Arden, of Cottesford (who married
Catharine, daughter of John Cheyney, and whose son was John Arden),
Richard, and Anthony, who married Margery, daughter and heir of Walter
Coxe, of Kirtlington, through whom he acquired this property. Anthony's
family consisted of John, Thomas,[517] Henry,[517] Alice, Margaret, and
Mary.

There were Indentures drawn up between Henry VIII. and "John Arderne, of
Cotisford" (see Cromwell's "Remembrances," 1534).

The will of John Arden, of Cottesford, Oxfordshire, gentleman,[518]
November 12, 1557, furnishes us with some particulars. He wished to be
buried before the cross in Cottesford beside his father's tomb. To
Katharine,[519] his wife, if she claimed no jointure, an annuity of L13
6s. 8d. (to be paid by brother Richard Arden, in the lordship of
Willaston), 300 marks, and the house they dwell in, with half the
furniture, etc. "To every of the children of Roger Arndern, of Evynley,
now living, twenty shillings." To his cousin, Robert Thorne, to his
cousin, Nicholas Thorne's wife, to his sister, Eleanor Yates, legacies.
"To John Ardern, son of Anthony Ardern,[520] my young brother,"
tenements, etc.; failing whom, they were to pass to Henry Ardern, third
son of his said brother. To the wives of Richard and Anthony, his
brothers, four angels. To Richard, his brother, all his titles to
Cottesford and Willaston, and to Anthony, his younger brother, the title
of his lease of Shelliswell. Residue to his brothers, the executors;
desiring Mr. Walter Wright, Doctor of the Civil Law and Archdeacon of
Oxfordshire, to be overseer. Witnesses, Nicholas Thorne, Walter Prior,
and John Tench. "Memor.: Laurence Pate, parson of Harwicke, had to hide
the will in his coffer till Arden's death."[521]

Robert Arden, of Berwyck, writes to the Earl of Leicester about Mr.
Arden, of Cotesford, March 1, 1588.

John Arden in 1595 prays some Court service. But in January, 1595-96, he
has been sent to the Marshalsea on suspicion of treason, when he was
about to marry. Nicholas Poutor, in October, 1601, promises to pay L100
to John Ardern, of Kirtlington, in October, 1602.

These Ardens are evidently connected with those of Evenly in
Northamptonshire. Thomas Arden, of Evenly, died between 1520-26; Roger
Arden, of Evenly, 1537-40; William Arden, of Norton, 1548-61.[522] The
Inventory of the goods of John Arden, of Evenley, gent., was taken
November 9, 1559. On the back of this is a settlement, dated 1576,
between John and Thomas Arden, and others.[523]

It is not clear whether the Cottesford Ardens are in any way connected
with a family residing at Henley-on-Thames, co. Oxon. In a will of
Robert Arden he left everything he had to his wife Margery, August 8,
1493;[524] and on February 24, 1525, John Arderne, of Henley,[525] drew
up a will leaving to his daughter Margery L6 13s. 4d.; and to his wife
Johane all his lands and tenements, with remainder, first to his son and
heir, Humphrey Arderne, after him to his son Robert, after him to his
son John, after him to his son Edmund or their heirs. His wife Johane,
executrix; James Hayles, overseer. Proved May 4, 1526.

Beyond the more important habitats, we find Ardens in many English
counties. John Yate, the elder, of Bockland, Berks, gent., in his will,
January 12, 1578,[526] mentions his son-in-law, Mr. John Arderne, and
Anthony Arderne, son of his daughter Bridget, deceased. John Daubeney,
of Woolmeston, gent., April 6, 1625, mentions his brother-in-law, Guy
Arden, of West Chinnock.[527]

The State Papers mention this family.

The names of such of the guard under the Earl of Leicester "as have been
lately preferred to your excellency in Holland, and by whom:

"John Arden, by Mr. Thomas Dudley, January 12, 1585."

"The names of the Household, Flushing, July 21, 1585, Clerk Comptroller,
Thomas Arden."[528]

John Arderne, will June 5, 1605; ob. s. p. December 17, 1605. Inq. at
Woodstock, 5 Jac. I. Oxford and Berks. Thomas, brother and heir, aet. 60.

Thomas Arderne, ob. s. p. August 31, 9 Jac. I. Inq. at Oxford, November
12, 14 Jac. I., Oxford. Henry, brother and heir, aet. 60.

Henry Arderne, ob. May 4 ult. Inq. at Oxford. August 22, August 20, 20
Jac. I. Oxford and Somerset. Margaret, d. and h., aet. 10 years 11 months
14 days.

Of this family probably sprung the Arden mentioned in Bishop Scory's
letter from Whitborn:[529] "Messrs. Mug, Blaxton, Arden and Gregory,
popish priests, were driven out of Exeter, but received elsewhere, and
feasted in the streets with torch-light."--August 17, 1561.

In a search for Arden and other prisoners who had escaped, Popish relics
were found in the house of Francis Yeates, of Lyfford,[530] February 12,
1587. "The examination of John Arden,[531] gent., son of Laurence Arden,
of Chichester, concerning an attempt made against the King of Spain, and
his dealings with Dr. Hall and other fugitives. His brother Robert had
been 24 years a Canon of Toledo in Spain."--December 27, 1590 (?). A
prisoner named Arden is noted for years among the accounts of the Tower
for the boarding of prisoners, and a Mr. Arden[532] escaped thence with
Father Gerard by the assistance of John Lily and Richard Fulwood,
October 8, 1597.

Thomas Arden, Canon of Worcester 1558, was deprived for Catholicism in
1562. (See Wood's "Athenae Oxonienses"; and also "John Arden(?), late
prebendary of Worcester, accused of heresy 1561.")

FOOTNOTES:

[465] Ormerod's "Cheshire." Ormerod's "Miscellanea Palatina," 72.

[466] Earwaker's "East Cheshire."

[467] Close Roll, 1213.

[468] Bridge's "Northampton"; Whalley's "Northampton," i. 568; Baker's
"Northampton."

[469] Nichols's "Top. et Gen.," i. 47-480.

[470] Issue Roll. Michaelmas, 41 Henry III.

[471] _Ibid._, 9 Edward II.

[472] Ormerod's "Miscellanea Palatina," 73; Nichols's "Coll. Geneal. et
Topog.," i. 47.

[473] Nichols's "Top. et Gen.," vi. 324.

[474] Charters lxxxii., 14.

[475] Earwaker's "East Cheshire," i. 324.

[476] Nichols's "Top. et Gen.," iv., p. 67.

[477] Nicolas's "Roll of Shropshire," 27 Edward II., p. 98, and
Nichols's "Top. et Gen.," vi. 324. No. 967, Parliamentary Roll of Arms
(_Genealogist_, New Series, xii.).

[478] Shaw's "Staffordshire."

[479] Inquis., December 23, 23 Edward III., 1349. See also Shaw's
"Staffordshire."

[480] Ormerod's "Miscellanea Palatina."

[481] Earwaker's "East Cheshire," i. 13, 324.

[482] See Inquis. P. M., 15 Richard II., Sir Thomas of Elleford,
Haselor, Kingsbromley, etc.

[483] See Will at Somerset House, 17 March. Inquis. P. M., 10 Henry IV.,
John of Elford, Lichfield, Kingsbromley, etc.

[484] A Cecilia de Arderne also appears as wife to a John Stanley.

[485] Ralph married Catharine, daughter of Sir W. Stanley, and had a son
Thomas, from whom the Leicestershire Ardens descended.--"Cheshire
Visitations."

[486] Drummond's "Noble British Families."

[487] Add. Ch., 20, 492.

[488] Ashmolean MSS., Bodleian Library. 833, f. 51-59. The family of
Hyde and Arderne, 837, f. 128, and 1137, f. 135 (Arderne pedigree.
Harleian MS., 2074, f. 113). Frances Marbury, nee Arden, married Thomas
Marbury, Esq., Marbury (Chester Funeral Certificates, 1634). Earwaker's
"East Cheshire," i. 472.

[489] Earwaker's "East Cheshire," 472.

[490] Burke's "General Armory."

[491] Commissary Court of London, vol. for 1614, ff. 387 and 443.

[492] Foss's "Lives of the Judges," iv. 281. Was he son of Peter of
Alvanley and Cicely de Hyde?

[493] Issues of the Exchequer.

[494] Foss's "Lives of the Judges," iv.

[495] 19 Godyn, Somerset House.

[496] See in 1510 pardon and release to Elizabeth Skreene, _alias_ widow
of Richard Harpur, _alias_ widow of Andrew Dymock, daughter of Sir Peter
Ardern (Papers, Henry VIII.).

[497] Thomas de Bibbesworth, who died 1485, held a moiety of the manor
of Latton (Morant's "Essex," ii. 487).

[498] Newcourt, ii. 543. A Thomas Arden, S.T.B., Prebend of Reculverland
in St. Paul's; Rector of Hadham Magna, exchanged for St. Bride's,
London; Rector of Stambridge Parva 1472. One of the masters of the
college of Pleshy was also called Thomas Arden, 1477, but seems to have
been another of the name. William Arden was presented to Stambridge,
1474.

[499] Add MS., xxxii. 490 (u. 9).

[500] Morant's "Essex," ii. 487.

[501] _Ibid._, i. 148.

[502] Close Rolls, 24 and 25 Henry VI.

[503] 24 Horne. Vicar of Littlebury, February 16, 1463; Strethall, April
25, 1467; Upminster, March 2, 1483 (Newcourt, ii. 394).

[504] Could it have been John Arden, executor of Walter Green? See Will
of Walter Green, Lord of the Manor of Hayes in Middlesex, December 6, 35
Henry VI., 1456, proved on February 12 by Elizabeth his wife, John
Gaynsford, his son-in-law, John Arden, Robert Green, his son, and John
Catesby, his son-in-law. His daughter Alice was wife of Sir John
Holgrave (Nichols, i. 211).

[505] 4 Milles.

[506] 5 Milles.

[507] Katharine Collins. See previous will.

[508] See will of Sir Peter Arderne, p. 203.

[509] 9 Dogett.

[510] Moone. Commissary Wills.

[511] Byfleet Manor in Busselagh parish, Surrey, belonged to John de
Arderne, 2 Edward III. (see Close Roll, 2 Edward III., m. 24), and
Mitcham (Inquis. P. M., 22 Edward III.). Leigh Place, near Reigate,
belonged to the Ardernes _temp._ Henry VI. John Arderne was Sheriff of
Surrey and Sussex in 1432. In Leigh Church is a sepulchral brass in
memory of John Arderne and Elizabeth his wife and six children, without
date. Also one to the memory of Richard Arderne and Johanna his wife,
which Richard died November 22, 1489(?). His arms were a Fesse chequy
between three crescents impaling a chevron three stags. Among gentlemen
12 Henry VI., "John Ardern of Lye," arm. (Fuller's "Worthies of Surrey,"
33; in Rot. Capella. Inquis. P. M., 15 Henry VII., Richard Arden).
Brayley's "Surrey," iv. 282.

[512] 8 Alenger.

[513] 54 Brudenell. See "Berkshire Wills." The Loan, 1523. The
certificate of Simon Yate, Highworth, and of Westropp, Walter Arden.
Pap. Henry VIII., P.R.O. In 1539 Simon and Thomas Yate each find a
horse, harness, bill, sword and dagger, and Walter Arden a horse and
harness with bows and arrows; Thomas Arden a harness.

[514] 53 Dale.

[515] See Harl. MS., 1095, f. 93. Harl. Public., Visit. Oxford. Sir
Thomas Phillipps' "Oxfordshire Visitations."

[516] Fuller's "Worthies of England," Oxfordshire, 343, gives among the
county gentry of 12 Henry VI. a William Anderne(?). Fuller thinks the
Commissioners passed too many gentry for this small shire. In others it
was the cream, here the thin milk.

[517] Inquis. P. M. of Thomas, 14 James I., of Henry, 20 James I.

[518] 52 Wrastley.

[519] Katharine, daughter of John Cheney of Woodaye, Esq., married to
John Arderne of Cottesford, co. Oxon. See Visitation of Wiltshire, 1565
(_Genealogist_, New Series, xii.).

[520] He had to prove his right to Kirtlington and Jackley,
Oxfordfordshire (Hil. Rec., 10 Elizabeth, Rot. 38).

[521] Anthony's will was proved in 1572, 3 Peter, Somerset House.

[522] Northampton and Rutland Wills.

[523] Inq. P. M., 1 & 2, Ph. & M.

[524] 11 Vox, Somerset House Wills.

[525] _Ibid._, 6 Porch.

[526] Somersetshire Wills, printed, Fourth Series.

[527] _Ibid._

[528] Cotton MS., Galba, c. viii.

[529] State Papers, Dom. Ser., Eliz., xix. 24.

[530] _Ibid._, cxcviii. 12.

[531] _Ibid._, ccxxxiv. 66.

[532] "Life of Father John Gerard," by John Morris, p. cxv.




CHAPTER V

BRANCHES IN OTHER COUNTIES


An interesting Arden whom I have not been able to connect with any
relatives was John Arderne, of Newark,[533] a physician who practised
with distinction at the time of the plague, 1349, and whose medical
books were freely quoted by Johannes Argentein and succeeding medical
writers.

I have not found his arms. There is, indeed, the seal of a John Arderne,
son and heir of Sir Adam de Arderne, of Lincolnshire, 1312, in the
British Museum, bearing a shield[534] "Ermine, on a bend three crosses
crosslet, depending from a tree of three small branches," who might have
been the same person.

Richard Arderne owned a messuage in Stanford, Lincoln, 27 Edward III.,
Inquis. P.M. As late as 1501 an Edmund Arden,[535] of St. Martin's,
Lincoln, left a gown to his brother Thomas, a gown to Pierce Arden, and
other legacies. John Gedney married Mary, daughter of John Arden, of
Sibsey, co. Lincoln (Visitation, 1592). In the neighbourhood there was a
noted Robert de Arderne, of co. Norfolk, 1315, whose seal bears two
shields side by side in fesse; Dext. ermine a fesse chequy Arden;
Sinist. on a fesse three garbs with cabalistic letters, explained in
_Journ. Brit. Arch. Ass._, xl. 317.[536]

Nothing brilliant is recorded of the Ardens of Yorkshire. Sir ---- de
Arderne, bearing arms Arg. a lion ramp. az. debruized by a baston gu.,
appears in Planche's Roll of Arms of Henry III.[537] John de Ardern, of
Yorkshire, is in the list of gentlemen of 43 Edward III. He is mentioned
also as witness for Haselden, of Goldyngton, 41 Edward III. Thomas
Arden, of Marton, near Bridlington, 1455, and Margaret, his wife, 1458,
were buried in Bridlington Priory.[538] William Ardern, of Belthorp, was
among the gentlemen of 12 Henry VI.[539] John Arderne, of Kelingthorpe,
secured an exemption from serving on juries, April 1, 8 Henry VIII., at
Greenwich.[540] There are many documents in the Record Office concerning
the sale of the lands of John Ardern, of Kelingthorpe,[541] York; and a
receipt from Thomas Perpoint, draper, London, of L516 paid him by John
Arden; also a release to Perpoint and John Arden by Thomas Hennage of
the Cardinal's household. To this Hennage, Arden grants the wardship of
his son Peter; and, if he should die, the wardship of Raffe; failing
whom, the wardship of John, his third son, 1533. His wife was Margery.
Sir Raff Ellerker married Jane, daughter of John Arden, Esq.
(Visitation, Yorks, 1563). There is also noted the Inquis. P. M., of
Peter Arden, of York, 22 Henry VIII.,[542] and William Arden's lease of
Yaresthorpe, Yorks. The priory of nuns at Arden, founded 1150, was
suppressed in 1536.[543]

[Illustration: SWAN THEATRE (BY DR. GAIDERTY.)

_To face p. 214._]

The Ardens appeared also early in Essex. At the Conqueror's Survey, Earl
Eustace of Boulogne owned Horndon-on-the-Hill,[544] but the next owners
were Ardernes, who built Ardern Hall. In 1122 Thomas Ardern and his son
Thomas gave to the monks of Bermondsey the tithe of the corn in their
lordship of Horndon. Sir Ralph de Ardern, of Horndon, was Sheriff of
Essex, 39 and 40 Henry III.[545] His seal bore on a shield a fesse
chequy between two roundels.[546] Sir Thomas de Arderne, the son of
Ralph, used "a seal, bearing two trumpets, mouthpieces in base, between
nine crosses crosslet in fesse, three and three, in pale S. Thome de
Arderne."[547] John Lovetot, who died in 1295, held land of him in
Horndon, by the service of one rose of yearly rent; and John de Arderne
granted lands in Rochford 33 Edward I.[548] The manor of Walkefares, in
Clavering, Essex, belonged to Walter Arden some time previous to
1340.[549]

The property of Timothy Arden, Somerset, was administered 1631.[550]

There was an Inquisition Post Mortem of William de Arderne, of
Chelesworthy Manor, Devon, in 56 Henry III. (39). Another of Adam de
Ardern, 53 Henry III. (35), owner of Colverden, Walesworth, and Berton
juxta Gloucester.

In 1 Edward VI. Inquisition Post Mortem of William Arden, Wig, the
administration of the goods of Richard Arden, of Worcester, was granted
his wife Margaret, 1636 (Admins., 1636-38, f. 116, Worcester).

William Arden, parson, of Wennington, in 1582, left small legacies to
his sister-in-law, Bridget Doulton, and all the rest to his two
daughters, Alice Arden, who married a Stevenson, and Margaret
Arden.[551]

In the Visitation of the Cheshire Ardens, it is stated that from Thomas,
son of Ralph and brother of John, the Leicestershire Ardens are
descended.[552]

In the great "History of Leicestershire," edited by Nichols, there are a
few notices of the name, and these chiefly of the Warwickshire Ardens,
who held property in the shire. Baldwin Freville owned certain lands at
Ratcliffe held by Roger de Ardern 1387.[553] Sir Robert of Park Hall was
Sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire 16 Henry VI.

"Thomas Ferrars holds of the heirs of Roger Arden the third part of the
feod of Radcliffe, Leicestershire," 37 Henry VI., Inquis. P. M. (34).

Simon de Ardern and Hugo de Arderne were priests 1387.[554]

In Bedford, the earliest entry I have found is the record of lands of
Sir Thomas de Arderne, "utlagatus pro feloniis et transgressionibus,"
Rokesden Manor and Bereford Cottage in Bedfordshire, 21 Edward III.
(Inquis. P. M. 60).

[Illustration: THE BEAR GARDEN AND HOPE THEATRE]

[Illustration: SWAN THEATRE.

_To face p. 216._]

William Ardern of Struton, in Oskellyswade, co. Beds, Clerk of the
Market to the King's household, Crest a boar quarterly, or and az.,
granted by Barker (Stowe, 692; "Misc. Gen. et Her.," Harwood, New
Series, xii. 13).[555] A William Ardern wrote to Cromwell, from Hawnes,
May 27, 1535, on behalf of Mr. Franklyn, cited before my Lord of Lincoln
(Letters and Papers Henry VIII., Gairdner). Can these be the same?
Compare pp. 171, 172, 188 and notes.

There was an Inquisition Post Mortem on the property of Isabel Arden,
Ideot, Bedfordshire, 10 Elizabeth.

The manor of Lyesnes, in Kent, was released to Thomas Ardern in 37 Henry
VIII.[556] There are many notices of the Kent Ardens in Hasted's
"History of Kent." But perhaps public attention was drawn most to the
member of the family who was murdered.[557] The story is closely
followed in the "Tragedy of Arden of Feversham," by some attributed to
Shakespeare, though with little probability.

Burke[558] gives many other branches; as, for instance, Arden of Sunbury
Park, Middlesex, and Rickmansworth Park, Herts; arms: Ermine, two
barrulets compony or and azure, in chief three boars' heads erased of
the last, armed of the second, langued gu.

Ardens of East Burnham, Bucks, same arms. Arden of Blackden Hall, co.
Chester, Ermine, a fesse chequy or and az.; same crest as the Park Hall
arms, but with different motto.

Various Ardens drifted to London, but there seems to have been one
business family settled there from early times. Thomas of Plumstede left
rents and a cellar, called Drynkwater Taverne, in the parish of St.
Magnus, to John Arderne, fishmonger, September 26, 1361.[559] John
Hanhampsted left the reversion of tenements held for life by John
Arderne, Esquire, in the parish of St. Mary Aldermanchurch, May 4,
1424.[560] An administration of goods of John Arderne, of St.
Sepulchre's, was granted February 15, 1508.[561]

In May, 1534, a pardon was granted John Appowell for abetting John Done,
a thief, who stole a gown and a piece of cloth belonging to Thomas
Ardrenne from the house of Thomas Chief, May, 1534.[562]

Thomas Arden, September 29, 1549, citizen and clothworker, left all his
goods to Agnes, his wife; will proved January 27, 1549.[563]

Robert Arden, of St. Martin's-in-the-Fields, vintner, and Agnes Mather
of the same, were licensed to be married at any church in the
jurisdiction of Westminster, November 27, 1568.[564]

A Robert Arden was assistant to the Clerk of the Accatory, 1577.[565]

Several deliveries to him of Government victuals are noted in State
Papers, 1594-97.

I do not know whether or not he is the Robert Arden who writes a letter
to the Government about the composition of ling and cod from the Iceland
fisheries, landed in Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, September 14, 1593, a
letter interesting as showing the relative trade of the towns at that
date.[566]

At St. Saviour's, Southwark, Robert Stillard and Bridget Arden were
married August 21, 1618.[567]

Among marriage licenses[568] are those of Richard Bromfield and Jane
Arden, February 14, 1564; John Arden and Dorothy Hazard, of the city of
Westminster, June 16, 1639;[569] Hugh Phillips, gent., of St.
Margaret's, Westminster, and Elizabeth Arden, of same, November 17,
1641;[570] Henry Arden, of Chelmsford, Essex, gent., widower, and Mary
Boosie, of Writtle, spinster, at St. Magnus the Martyr, London, February
22, 1664;[571] Thomas Arden, of the city of Westminster, Esq., to
Theodosia Long, October 10, 1664; William Ardern, junior, gent., Bach.,
of St. Martin's, Ludgate, and Mrs. Margaret Smith, of Great Wigborough,
Essex, widow, to be married there, March 21, 1665-66;[572] John Arden,
of St. James's, Westminster, widower, aged about fifty, and Mrs.
Elizabeth Wright, spinster, twenty-two, January 12, 1687-88.

Gabriel Josselyn, gent., of St. Michael, Bassinghall,[573] and
Elizabeth, daughter of ---- Arden of same, deceased, December 1, 1587.

John Brown, of St. Olave's, Hart Street, London, haberdasher, and Anne
Arden, of St. Andrew's,[574] Holborn, widow of John Ardern, Fletcher,
February 10, 1595.

The will of Robert Arden, gent., Deptford, was proved 1579.[575]

An Alexander Arderne, of Deptford, wished to be buried in the churchyard
beside the hawthorn-tree; he had a wife, Elizabeth, a brother-in-law,
William Inson, and no children, February 26, 1639.[576] Administration
of the goods of James Arden, London, was granted his wife Anne,[577]
1639. Thomas le Barber, from Peter de Arderne, held tenements in the
parish of St. Clements Danes.[578] Alicia Arderne, who was wife of
Richard Hampton, left tenements in the parish of St. Mary in the Strand
and in the parish of St. Clement's Danes, 1466.

It seems wiser to group a set of records not generally accessible to
students, which, though preserved in London, concern the Ardens of many
branches--I mean a set of deeds, charters, and conveyances preserved
among the Guildhall Records of London:

    "Johanna Arden, wife of Roger de Arden, tailor, 1295. Roll 24.

    "Henry de Arderne, A.D. 1305. Roll 34 (35).

    "Cecilia, wife of Henry de Arderne, 1307. Roll 36 (26).

    "Agnes, wife of William de Arderne, 1307....

    "Henry, son of William de Arderne....

    "John, son of William de Arderne, 1337 and 1345.

    "Hugh de Arderne, 1321. Roll 50 (5); A.D. 1342. Roll 70 (2).

    "Alice, wife of Hugh de Arderne ... Johanna, wife of ...

    "Giles de Arderne, 1351. Roll 80 (29).

    "John Arden, called Mordon, Stockfishmonger, 1363.
        Roll 91 (87) (93); also 1371, 1373, 1374, 1377.

    "Margaret, wife of John, called Mordon....

    "Isabella, wife of Richard Arden, and widow of John Melbourne,
        co. Surrey, 1392. Roll 121 (143).

    "Alice, wife of Thomas de Arden, Brewer, 1371. Roll 99 (83).

    "... 1372. Roll 100 (54) (55), 1373, 1376; 104 (145).

    "Alice, widow of Richard de Arderne, 1403. Roll 131 (61).

    "John Arden, Esq., 1413. Roll 141 (25-36); 1421 (Roll 149).

    "... 1426. Roll 154 (50); 1457, Roll 185 (32).

    "Margaret, wife of John Arden, gent., 1413 and 1421; same Rolls.

    "Peter Ardern, chief Baron of the Exchequer, 1459. Roll 188 (37).

    "Thomas Arden, clerk, 1466. Roll 196 (17).

    "John Arden, of Creechurch, merchant tailor, 1625. Roll 302 (15).

    "Francis Arden, son of Richard, Cit. and Loriner,
        of London, 1646, Apprentice."

The Royalist Composition Papers,[579] 1644-57, mention as "Delinquents,"
"Mr. Arden," "John," "Robert" is mentioned twenty-three times, "Thomas,"
"Ann," "Elizabeth," "Godetha," "Mary," "Mrs. Arden," "John and Mary
Arderne." And many other allusions could be added to the list of
references to the various members of this distinguished family.


COLONIAL ARDENS.

In speaking of the Ardens of Victoria, Burke[580] disclaims their right
to arms, but nevertheless derives them from Humphrey Arden. He says:
"The first recorded ancestor, Humphrey Arden, of Longcroft, co.
Stafford, died in 1705, and so far from being able to show descent from
Siward, they are unable even to prove connection with the extinct family
of Arden of Park Hall."

Here Burke is clearly in the wrong. If they can prove their descent from
Humphrey of Longcroft, they can through him claim descent from the
Ardens of Park Hall and from Siward, as can be seen from all pedigrees.

FOOTNOTES:

[533] Ashmolean MS., 829, iii., and 1434, i.; also Sententiae, 1437, Art.
xv., alluded to in Gerard's "Herbal," 657.

[534] Harl. Chart., 45, D. 9.

[535] 23 Moone, proved May 26, 1501.

[536] "Misc. Gen. et Her.," N. S., iv. 21; "Yorksh. Archaeo. Journ.," xi.
12.

[537] Burton's "Monasticon Eboracense," p. 250.

[538] Fuller's "Worthies of Yorkshire."

[539] Letters and Papers Henry VIII., 1524, _et seq._, Gairdner.

[540] Pat. 9 Henry VIII., p. 1, m. 14.

[541] Add. Chart. 8069. See also Blomfield's "Hist. of Norfolk," viii.
533.

[542] Peter Arden, son and heir of John, ob. May 20, 21 Henry VIII.;
Inq. at Poklyngton, York. Ralph Arden, brother and heir of Peter, then
aged eighteen.

[543] Burton's "Monasticon Eboracense," p. 90.

[544] Morant's "History of Essex," i. 216.

[545] Fuller's "Worthies of Essex," 341.

[546] Harl. Charters, 45, D. 8, Brit. Mus. See also p. 193.

[547] Add Chart., 19,967.

[548] Inquis. Post. Mort., 33 Edward I., 117.

[549] Morant's "Essex," i. 148. John Arderne was Vicar of Harwich
Chapel, March 23, 1388. Will Arderne, Vicar of Tolleshunt Darcy, April
4, 1676.

[550] Administrations, Somerset, f. 4, 1631-33.

[551] Consistory Court, f. 162, Sperin, and 291, Bullock.

[552] Visitation of Cheshire.

[553] "History of Leicester," iv. 939.

[554] _Ibid._, 19.

[555] This William Arden left a son, Thomas, who had no heirs ("Grants
and Certificates of Arms," _Genealogist_, New Series, xiii.).

[556] Originalia et Memoranda on the Lord Treasurer's side of the
Exchequer.

[557] "Receyved of Mr. Arden for a payer of wheels and the hedd of an
old pageant, 2s. 8d. 1504." "Payd. For the charges of brenning Mrs.
Arden, and the execution of George Bradshaw, 43s."--Chamberlain's
Accounts, City of Canterbury, 1550-1.

[558] Burke's "General Armory."

[559] Wills of the Court of Hustings, ii., p. 63.

[560] _Ibid._

[561] Commissary Court Admins., 1508.

[562] Papers of Henry VIII., P.R.O.

[563] 31^a Clyffe, Commissary Court Wills.

[564] Chester's "Marriage Licenses of Bishop of London."

[565] State Papers, Dom. Ser., Eliz., cxx. 34.

[566] Brit. Mus., Add. MS., 34,729.

[567] Registers of St. Saviour's, Southwark.

[568] "Marriage Licenses of Dean of Westminster," Harl. Publ.

[569] _Ibid._

[570] "Marriage Licenses of Dean of Westminster," Harl. Pub.

[571] _Ibid._

[572] _Ibid._

[573] Chester's "Marriage Licenses."

[574] _Ibid._

[575] 35 Bakou.

[576] 5 Stevenson, Somerset House.

[577] Administrations, 1639, f. 36, Somerset House.

[578] Inquis. P.M., 1 Edward III. (12).

[579] See Index Library (12).

[580] Burke's "Colonial Gentry," _Genealogist_, New Series, xiii.




TERMINAL NOTES.


Page 2.--Mary, Countess of Southampton, was the mother of Shakespeare's
patron, the Earl of Southampton, to whom he dedicated "Venus and Adonis"
in 1593, and "The Rape of Lucrece" in 1594. In both of these poems,
probably corrected by himself, his name is spelt _Shakespeare_. In 1594
the Countess married Sir Thomas Henneage, the Vice-Chamberlain of the
Household, and that same year Shakespeare was invited to act at Court.
Sir Thomas died the following year, after a lingering illness, and his
widow had to superintend the making up of his official books, and check
the bills. And thus it happened that it was she who introduced the
_first official record of Shakespeare's name_, and probably spelt it
correctly, according to the contemporary usage.

Page 5.--Mr. Nanson, the town clerk of Carlisle, has in his possession
the deed which concerns the Shakesperes of Penrith, 21 Richard II.

Page 22.--Shakespeare's shield bore an ordinary _canting_ pattern, or
one that was based upon the supposed meaning of the name. But the use of
the falcon in the crest requires explanation. French says: "The falcon
was one of the badges of Edward IV., father of Henry VII.'s Queen
Elizabeth. No person would venture to adopt this without special favour"
("Shakespeareana Genealogica," p. 523). There is something keenly
suggestive of expected objections in the motto, "Non sanz droict." Some
day, perhaps, it may be discovered why this crest and motto were
assumed.

Page 27.--Aston Cantlow, with the castle of Abergavenny, was settled on
Sir William de Beauchamp, second son of Thomas, Earl of Warwick, 12
Henry IV. It descended to his son, Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Worcester,
whose daughter Elizabeth married Sir Edmund Neville, and brought it to
him (Dugdale's "Warwickshire").

Page 27.--Another opinion of the derivation of Thomas Arden has been
discussed. It has been supposed possible that he might have been
descended from Thomas Arden of Leicestershire, son of Ralph Arden of
Alvanley, by his wife Catharine, daughter of Sir William Stanley, of
Hooton. This would account for the grant of the Cheshire arms, and would
not thrust him out of the Arden pedigree; but the theory is not
satisfactory on other grounds. One main objection is that there was no
known Thomas of suitable date in that family. But in the Park Hall
family there was a Thomas known to be alive during the period between
1502 and 1526, who has _never been traced_, if he did not go to Aston
Cantlow. Members of the Arden family accept him as the missing brother
of Sir John, and believe that it was through a careless mistake of the
heralds that the fesse chequy was struck out, and that the Shakespeares
resented the substitution of another in place of the arms to which they
had a right, and never accepted the grant. During the discussion John
Shakespeare died.

Page 27.--The pedigrees of those associated with the Ardens are worth
noting, and their wills might suggest connections.

Page 32.--It would be interesting to find and group the Warwickshire
Ardens who bore the three cross-crosslets and the chief or, for it has
never been done.

Page 35.--Thomas Arden was presented for owing suit of Court in 1526,
1529, 1531. (See Portfolio 207, Court Rolls, No. 88.)

Page 36.--Thomas and Robert Arden's purchase at Snitterfield had been
witnessed by John Wagstaff,[581] Richard Rushby, of Snitterfield,
Richard Atkins, of Wilmecote, John Alcokkes, of Newenham. The overseers
of Robert Arden's will were Adam Palmer,[582] of Wilmecote, Hugh
Porter,[583] of Snitterfield, and John Skerlett, of Wilmecote; the
witnesses, Sir William Bouton Curett, Adam Palmer, John Scarlet, Thomas
Jenkes, William Pitt. Adam Palmer was overseer of Mrs. Agnes Arden's
will, in conjunction with George Gibbes, who had, later, the lease of
Asbies from the Shakespeares at the time of its mortgage to Lambert.

Page 45.--A Thomas Mayo had a seat in the Church of St. Nicholas,
Warwick, 1595; an Elizabeth Mayo was buried there in 1596; and Henry
Maio in 1601. (See Churchwarden's Accounts of St. Nicholas, Warwick,
edited by Mr. Richard Savage.) The Webbes of Snitterfield appear among
the gentry of the country in 1580 (State Papers, Domestic Series, Eliz.,
c. xxxvii. 68).

Page 51.--It is difficult to imagine John Shakespeare making up the
bills for the other Chamberlains, or conducting so many financial
responsibilities, if he was unable to read and write, as well as reckon
well--as Halliwell-Phillipps says he was.

Page 52.--The goods of Richard Shakespeare were prised at L35 17s., and
the bond for their just administration entered into by John Shakespeare
and Thomas Nicols, of L100, seems disproportionably large, unless there
were some unusually heavy responsibilities attached. John Shakespeare
may very well have been termed a farmer if he had been brought up as
one, and if he had been superintending his father's farm at the time of
his death. In the description of a neighbouring farm, Ingon is mentioned
as "now or late in the occupation of John Shaxspere or his assignes." It
is quite possible that he was the responsible farmer, and that Henry his
brother was his "assigne." Ingon, though in the parish of
Hampton-on-Avon, was very near Snitterfield.

Page 56.--Henry Shakespeare probably quarrelled with Mr. Cornwall, the
second husband of Margaret Arden, about the resettlement of Snitterfield
farm, and went to reside at Ingon, though taken in his brother's name.
The Court Rolls show that he was "contumaceous" in not paying tithes,
May 22, 1582, and was "excommunicated." "Of Henry Shaxper, for not
labouring with teems for the amending of the Queen's Highway, 2/6." "Of
Henry Shaxper for having a dich between Redd Hill and Burmans in decay
for want of repair, Oct. 22nd, 1596." Probably the man was ill and dying
then. He was buried two months later.

Page 58.--The petition of the burgesses of Stratford-on-Avon for relief
of burdens shows that the borough had fallen into decay through the
decline in the wool trade. From this general depression John Shakespeare
probably suffered.

Page 61.--"The Book of John Fisher of Warwick" shows that the master of
the Grammar School there had a salary of L10 a year. Seeing that the
master of Stratford-on-Avon Grammar School had L20 a year, it is
probable that the burgesses had a better selection of scholars as
candidates.

Page 62.--It is too often forgotten that Anne Hathaway lost her father
in the summer of 1582. It is probable that the betrothal would therefore
be a quiet one. It is also more than likely that she went to reside with
a friend or relative after her father's death, and that this caused the
confusion in the address in the marriage bond. The bridegroom in general
only required one guarantee for a bond of the kind; but Shakespeare
being under age, the one became his representative, and the other
guarantor for that representative.

Page 67.--"The Comedy of Errors" was doubtless one of the plays
performed before the Queen at Christmas, 1594, seeing that it was ready
to be put upon the boards at the Gray's Inn Revels on the spur of the
moment. I have discussed this at full in my paper, "The Earliest
Official Record of Shakespeare's Name," Berlin (a copy at the British
Museum); also in a long letter to the _Times_, January, 1895.

Page 70.--James Burbage bought the part of a house in Blackfriars from
Sir William More, February 4, 1596, which he afterwards converted into a
theatre. Regarding the quarrel with Allen and "the Theatre" lease, see
the depositions in the case of Burbage _v._ Allen taken at Kelvedon, in
Essex, August, 1600, reproduced in Halliwell-Phillips's "Outlines," i.
350. Further illustration of the earning proportions of players and
proprietors may be learned from the article by Mr. James Greenstreet,
"The Whitefriars Theatre at the Time of Shakespeare" (The New
Shakespearean Society's Transactions, 1888).

Page 77.--In John Combe's will there is mentioned a field in Ingon Lane,
called Parson's Close, or Shakespeare's Close. This may have been one of
the poet's minor purchases, or merely a name come down from Henry's
time.

Page 78.--A petition was sent up to the Lord Chief Justice from the
Corporation of Stratford-on-Avon, to restrain William Combe, Esq., son
and heir of John Combe, March 27, 1616. He overthrew the Aldermen who
came peaceably to hinder his digging, whereof great tumult arose. In
spite of orders to the contrary, he continued his enclosures, and
another petition was addressed to the Privy Council, describing "Mr.
Combe of so unbridled a disposition," etc. On February 14, 1618, a reply
came signed, "Francis Verulam," "Pembroke," "Naunton," "Fulke Greville"
(Wheler Collection, Stratford-on-Avon).

Page 82.--From the town clerk's account of what took place at the Halls
during Shakespeare's lifetime, we are sure that his position must have
been anomalous.

"The Halle, 17 Dec., 45 Eliz. Plays. At this Halle yt ys ordered that
there shalbe no plays or enterludes played in the Chamber, the Guild
Halle, nor in any parte of the House or Courte, from hensforward, upon
payne that whosoever of the Baylif, Aldermen, and burgisses of this
boroughe shall give leave or licence thereunto shall forfeit for everie
offence 10s.

    "7 Feb., 1611-12, 45 Eliz."

"... The inconvenience of plaies being verie seriouslie considered of,
with their unlawfulness, and how contrarie the sufferance of them is
against the orders heretofore made, and against the examples of other
well-governed cities and burrowes the Compaine here are contented, and
they conclude that the penaltie of 10s. imposed in Mr. Baker's year, for
breaking of the order shall from henceforth be L10 upon breakers of that
order, and this to holde until the next common council, and from
henceforth for ever, excepted that be then finally revoked and made
void." This was the period of Shakespeare's retirement to
Stratford-on-Avon.

Page 84.--It may be noted as a coincidence that the plays were published
in folio the year of Mrs. Shakespeare's death. Some change among the
leases, or the termination of the connection with his family through the
death of his widow, may have suggested this.

Page 93.--A Robert Hall rented the old School House in
Stratford-on-Avon, and paved the Guild Hall, 1568. A Richard Hall was
churchwarden of St. Nicholas, Warwick, in 1552, who died in 1558, and
among the churchwarden's accounts are notices of Richard Hall the
younger, Nicholas Hall, John, Alice, Simon and "Eme Hall." "Received of
Ric. Hawle the younger for the benevolence that Richard Hawle gave unto
the poor out of his lands in Church Street, World without end," 1566-67.
Richard Hall was churchwarden in 1600 and in 1606 (Churchwarden's
Accounts, St. Nicholas, Warwick, Mr. Richard Savage).

Page 99.--Michael Drayton frequently visited Sir Henry Rainsford at the
Manor House, Clifford Chambers. This gentleman had married Anne Goodyere
of Polesworth, whose parents were Drayton's patrons. She was the "Idea"
of his sonnets. (See introduction to "Michael Drayton," by Oliver Elton,
1895.)

Page 103.--Susanna Hall's signature appears on the settlements of 1639,
and on that of 1647, in which her daughter joined.

Page 104.--"15th Dec., 1648. Tithes: Mrs. Elizabeth Nashe for Shottery
Corne Tithes, being of the yearly value of one hundred pounds, L5."
"28th June, 1650. Mrs. Elizabeth Barnard for Shotterie Corn tythes of
the yearly value of one hundred and twentie pounds, L6." (Wheler's
Notes, Stratford-on-Avon.)

Page 107.--There are many Bagleys in the parish registers of St.
Martin's-in-the-Fields, and also Hathaways. It _may_ be they were
connections.

Page 110.--Halliwell-Phillipps states that in the "Coram Rege Roll of
1597, Gilbert Shakespeare is named as one of those standing bail for a
clockmaker of Stratford"; and adds that he is described as "Haberdasher
of St. Bridget's Parish, London." Through the kind permission of the
Worshipful Company of Haberdashers, I have been allowed to go through
their books at leisure, and find that there is no trace of a Shakespeare
anywhere, and in the sixteenth century, no trace even of a _Gilbert_,
except "Gilbert Shepherd," who took up his freedom in 1579. Neither is
there any trace of him in the registers of St. Bridget's or St. Bride's,
nor in the Subsidy Rolls, but in both places appear Gilbert Shepherd. I
am, therefore, forced to the conclusion that Halliwell-Phillipps misread
"Shepherd" as "Shakespeare." See my article in the _Athenaeum_, Dec. 22,
1900, "John Shakespeare, of Ingon, and Gilbert of St. Bride's."

Page 112.--William Hart, the hatter, died a week before his
brother-in-law, probably of the same epidemic. Joan Hart, his widow,
survived till November 4, 1646. Their eldest son William was an actor.
(See Royal Warrant, May 17, 1636; Halliwell-Phillipps, i. 129.) In
William Hewitt's "Visits to Remarkable Places," 1839, he mentions
Stratford and a boy whom he had noticed from his likeness to the poet.
He turned out to be a descendant of his sister Joan Hart, and was called
William Shakespeare Smith (_Notes and Queries_, 5th Series, VIII. 475).
Probably the same referred to on page 109.

Page 116.--Thomas Shakespeare seemed to have been somewhat like Henry in
character. He was entered on the Court Roll at a rental of L4 in 1563.
"At the Court 31st March, 23 Eliz., he incurred a penalty of 4d. for not
having and exercising bows; for not wearing cappes 4d.; for leaving his
swine unringed in the fields 12d." He appears also as a juror several
times in court.

Page 121.--Mr. Rylands' "Records of Rowington" supply many details, as,
for instance:

"In 1576, a lease by feoffees, among whom was Thomas Shakespeare, was
granted Richard Shakespeare of Rowington, weaver of the 'Tyinges.'"

In the same year a lease of "the Harveys" was granted to "Elenor
Shakespeare, widow, of Rowington," 20 Feb., 18 Eliz.

The customary rent of Rowington, 1605, mentions "Thomas Shakespeare, one
close, 2/; one tofte and 16 acres, 13/4; one messuage, etc., 10/4."

     "George Shakespeare, one cottage and 2 acres, 2/."

     "Richard Shakespere, one messuage, half a yd land (14
     acres), 14/."

     "John Shakespeare, one cottage and one quarter yd land (9
     acres), 6/8."

The Court Rolls, 1633, give:

     "Imprimis of Jane Shaxper for default of sute of court
     fined, 4d."

     "Thomas Shaxper, vitler, for breaking assize of ale and
     beer, 4d."

     "1634, Richard Shaxper, for encroaching on common, 2d."

     "1647, fine of admittance to land, Thomas Shaxper, 6/8."

     "Exchequer lay subsidies," Thomas in 1595, 1598, 1599,
     "assessed on goods valued L4,8/."

     "Lay subsidies 1668," Thomas, "assessed on land, 30/ and
     4/."

In 1674 John Shakespeare, in the name of the other tenants of Rowington,
was empowered to bring an action against enclosures.

A grant of a fee of 20/ a year by will of Humphrey Shakespeare, 1794,
was payable out of premises in Kingswood.

This cottage was the subject of a lawsuit in which Jane Lord and John
Slye _v._ Humphrey Shakespeare and one Culcup were at variance. Humphrey
had a 200 years' lease, and left it to the poor of the parish.


SHAKESPEARES FROM THE REGISTER OF ROWINGTON.

     "1616, Mar. 16. Baptisms: Thomas Shaxspere, son of William
     Shaxspire."

     "1619, Ap. 28. William Shakespeare, son of John
     Shakespeare."

     "Aug. 13. William Shakespeare, son of Thomas Shakespeare."

     "1621, Aug. 18. Thomas Shaxper, son of Thomas Shaxper."

     "Nov. 4. Elizabeth, dau. of John Shaxper."

     "1622, William Shaxpere was Churchwarden."

     "1624, April 26. Clement Shaxpire, son of John Shaxpire,
     bapt."

     "July 23. John Sheldon and Jone Shaxspear married."

     "1630, Ap. 4. Baptisms: Elizabeth Shaxspeare, d. of Thomas
     Shaxspire."

     "1633, Ap. 20. Thomas Shaxspeare, son of Thomas Shaxspeare."

     "1634, Dec. 30. Thomas Shakspeare, son of John Shaxspeare."

     "1635, May 5. Burial: John Shakespear buried."

     "1637. Baptisms: July 18, Mary, dau. of Thomas and Elizabeth
     Shakesper."

     "1638, Aug. 17. Burial: Christopher Shakspeare buried."

     "1639, Mar. 8. Baptism: John, son of John Shakespeare and
     Mary bapt.

     "William Shaxspere Churchwarden."

     "1640, Aug. 3. Burials: Anne, d. of Thomas Shakespeare,
     buried."

     "1641, April 10. Thomas Shakespear, son of Thomas Shakespear
     and Margaret, bur."

     "Oct. 30. Mary, daughter of Thomas Shakespear, buried."

     "1642, Feb. 14. Thomas, son of John Shakespeare, buried."

     "1643, June 14. Clement, son of John Shakespeare, buried."

     "1645, Sept. 18. Anne Shakespeare, widowe, buried."

     "1646, July 12. William Shakespeare buried."

     "July 24. The wife of William Shakespeare buried."

     "Feb. 20. William Shakespeare, senior, buried."

     "Mar. 8. Thomas Shakespeare buried."

     "1647, Sep. 20. Mary, dau. of William Shakespeare, junior,
     and Elizabeth his wife, buried."

     "Oct. 1. Elizabeth, d. of John Shakespear, buried."

     "Nov. 4. Elizabeth, dau. of William Shakespeare, jun., and
     Margaret his wife."

     "1649, Oct. 5. William Shakspeare, junior, buried."

     "1650, Dec. 25. John Shakespeare, junior, buried."

     "1651, Mar. 3. Widow Shakspeare buried."

              [A gap in the registers.]

     "1662, Feb. 17. John, sonne of John Shakspeare of Kingswood,
     bapt."

     "1663, Mar. 29. Thomas, son of John Shakspeare of ye hill,
     bapt."

     "1664, Feb. 8. Josiah, sonne of John Shakespeare of ye hill,
     bap. Feb. 8, buried Feb. 17."

     "1665, Ap. 3. Richard, son of John Shakespeare of Kingswood,
     bapt."

     "1665, Dec. 3. Mary, dau. of John Shakespeare, bapt."

     "1666, Mar. 18. John Shakspeare of Kingswood brook buried."

     "1667, Aug. 6. Old William Shakespeare of Brookfurlong
     buried."

     "Nov. 23. Margaret Shakespeare of Whitehall, widdow, buried.
     John Shakesper Churchwarden."

     "1668, June 1. Samuel, son of John Shakespeare and Rebecca,
     his wife, bapt., buried June 6."

     "June 28. Rebecca, wife of John Shakespeare of the Hill,
     buried."

     "1669, Nov. 20. Old Thomas Shakespeare of Whitley Elme,
     buried."

     "1670, Sep. 29. Widdow Shakespeare of ye Hill buried."

     "Oct. 20. Thomas Shakespear the weaver was buried."

     "1672, Ap. 9. Ann, dau. of Mr. Shakespeare of ye Hill,
     bapt."

     "1676, Mar. 18. (Mary) the wife of Thomas Shakespeare, of
     Lowston End, buried."

     "1677, April 21. Widdow Shakespeare of Whitley Elme,
     buried."

     "1679, July 31. William Shakespeare and Alice Jennings
     married."

     "1679-80, Jan. 27. Thomas Shakespeare of Lapworth buried."

     "1680, Nov. 9. Alice, wife of William Shakespeare, buried."

     "1682, Oct. 19. William, son of William Shakespeare, of
     Lowston ford, bapt., and buried Dec. 27."

     "1683, Ap. 24. Thomas Shakespeare and Anne Biddle married."

     "1686, June 21. William Shakespeare of Brookfurlong buried."

     "Dec. 12. John, son of Thomas Shakespeare, bapt."

     "Feb. 19. Thomas Shakespeare of Rowington buried."

     "1687, Sep. 15. William, son of John Shakespeare, jun.,
     bapt."

     "1688, Dec. 10. Thomas Shakespeare buried."

     "1693, Nov. 14. John, son of Thomas Shakespeare of Lapworth,
     buried."

     "1695, Aug. 10. William Shakespeare, senior, buried."

     "1696, Nov. 11. Thomas, son of William Shakespere, bapt."

     "1697, May 12. Henry Shakespeare of London buried."

     "1707, July 1. Thomas Shakespear buried."

     "1710, July 13. John Shakespeare, senior, buried."

     "1721-2, Jan. 30. (By licence) Francis Chernocke, of
     Killingworth, co. Warr., gent., about 24, and Mary
     Shakespeare, of Rowington, about 24, maiden, his father
     consenting, her parents dead. He sealed ... within ... on a
     bend ... three crosses crosslet[584] in sinister ... chief a
     mullet for difference" (see Worcester Marriage Licenses).

From overseers' books: "Buried in Woolen":

     "1695, Aug. 10. William Shakespere, senior."

     "1697, May 12. Henry Shakespere of London."

     "1707, March 24. Edward Shakespeare."

     "1710, July 13. John Shakespeare, senior."

     "1716, Dec. 4. William Shakespere, Blacksmith."

Page 131.--In "The Book of John Fisher, Bailiff of Warwick in 1580,"
edited by Mr. Thomas Kemp, deputy-Mayor of Warwick, are several notices
of Shakespeare. In the first page he is mentioned, and later on we find
that he lived in the Market-Place Ward, and was assessed 1d. weekly for
relief of the poor.

A "Thomas Shakesper" lived at the same time in West Street Ward, and was
assessed the same amount. These may be the Thomas and John, sons of
Thomas Shakespeare, shoemaker, of Warwick, who made his will in 1557.
There is also a casual allusion to Shakespeare the turner, of Rowington;
and in 1580-81 John Fisher notes: "I paid to ---- Shakesper, servant to
Mr. Humphrey Catheryns, for fees for the discharge of 39/7-1/2 charged
upon the Church of St. Maryes, in Mr. Boughton's account for subsidy
supposed to be due in the 5th yere of Queen Elizabeth, 9/-."

"Thomas Shakespeare of Warwick's son John was apprenticed to William
Jaggard the Stationer of London 1609" (Rylands's "Records of
Rowington").

"John, son of Thomas Shakespeare of Coventry, co. Warwick, pleb. p.p.
St. John's Coll., matric. 18th Oct., 1662, aged 18; B.A. from St. Mary
Hall 1666 (subscribes serv.)"--(Oxford Alumni and graduates). "Vicar of
Anstrey, co. Warwick, 1670" (Foster's "Index Eccles.").

Page 134.--The registers of All Saints', Oxford, date from 1549; St.
Michael's, 1559; St. Peter's-in-the-East, 1563; St. Martin's Carfax,
1569; St. Giles', 1576; St. Peter-le-Bailey, 1585; St. Mary's, 1599; St.
John Baptist's, 1616.

Page 134.--"Thomas Shakespeare and Jane Toupe married ye 2nd Maie,
1625." (Register of Mere. _Notes and Queries_, 9th Series, iii. 109.)
The county not named. It may be either Cheshire, Wiltshire or
Lincolnshire.

Page 141.--One, at least, of the Irish Shakespeares was a suspicious
character. "William Shakespeyre, formerly of Kilmaynham Hibernia,
laborer, arrested for suspected felony 6 Ed. VI." ("Chester in the
Plantagenet and Tudor Reigns," Canon Rupert Morris; also _Notes and
Queries_, 8th Series, x. 192).

Page 147.--I find that "Gutheridge" was a Stratford-on-Avon name. Mr.
Gutheridge was a dealer in leather there (see will of Joyce Hobday,
1602); and John Milburn was a Rowington man (see the Records of
Rowington)--which two facts much increase the likelihood of John, of St.
Clement's Danes, being at least a Warwickshire man, if not the
Snitterfield one.

Page 151.--"Edward Shakespear, Clare, A.B. 1728; A.M. 1736"
("Cantabrigensis Graduati").

"Joh. Jos. Art. Shakespear, Trin., A.B. 1844; A.M. 1848"
("Cantabrigensis Graduati").

Page 162.--The first Earl of Warwick, Arthgal, was said to have slain a
bear with a blow from a young tree which he had pulled up, and
afterwards he used as a badge "the bear and the ragged staff"--a device
borne by succeeding earls.

Page 166.--Osbert de Ardern granted an estate near Tamworth to Walter de
Somerville, 2 Henry II. (Shaw's "Staffordshire," i. 118).

Page 168.--Among the Rowington charters is (No. 11) a grant by Robert de
Arderne, son and heir of Thomas le Hayward, of Shrewley, 2 Edward III.
No. 12 is a "Grant from Nicholas Wylemyn de Shrewely to his son John of
his Shrewley tenements and lands, which Thomas de Arderne formerly held
of John, Lord of Shrewley, 2 Edward III." Mr. Rylands thinks these refer
to the same people and property.

The Nottingham Visitation (under Blondeston) refers to the pedigree. Sir
Thomas Arden, 9 Edward II., married Elizabeth, daughter of Roger
Swinford; their son was Roger Arden, whose wife was unknown, but his
daughter and heir Beatrix married William Chamber.

Page 171.--William _may_ have been the member of the Guild of Knowle for
whose sake masses were said in 1512. "Alicia" may have been his wife, or
his sister Alice before she married "Buklond." But I confess I am
puzzled with this William.

Page 171.--The tombs of Walter and Eleanor are well preserved in
Erdington's Chantry of the Church of St. Peter and Paul, at Aston, near
Birmingham. He died August 5, 1502.

Page 173.--The Shropshire Visitation gives: "William de Chettleton m.
Katharine, d. of Sir John Ardern; Elizabeth, d. of Reginald Corbet of
Stoke, Justice of the Royal Pleas, m. Robert Arden of Park Hall."
"Katharine Mucklow" also is mentioned; and "William Wall m. Elizabeth,
d. of Thomas Ardren, of Billingsly, in co. Salop."

Page 173.--Sir John Arden's will is long and interesting. It directs
that the furniture of the King's chamber should be kept as heirlooms,
also "the silver cup." "It is said that it was Henry VII. who honoured
him by staying in his house, and that he then granted Sir John a Cap of
Maintenance, purpure turned up crimson, upon which the wild boar is
represented instead of on a wreath as before" (Arden MSS.).

Page 175.--The indenture of a lease by Thomas Arderne, Esq., and Mary
his wife, to William Wilmer, of Longly, co. Warwick, husbandman, of a
messuage, lands, etc., in Wilmer, late in the tenure of Robert Wilmer,
deceased, was drawn up July 15, 23 Henry VIII., 1541. The lease was for
thirty years, the yearly rent 10s. 3d., with a heriot of the best beast,
the lessee to "furnish a sufficient horse for a harnesseman to ryde
upon, when the King shall call upon the said Thomas Arderne for
harnessyng of men." This is Thomas of Park Hall (Wheler Collection,
Stratford-on-Avon).

Page 178.--The tomb of Sir Edward Devereux (died 1622), and of his wife,
Katharine Arden (died 1627), are preserved in the church of Aston, near
Birmingham, beside those of her ancestors, Walter and Eleanor.

Page 181.--In the "Visitation of Warwickshire," published by the
Harleian Society, there are many evident slips in proper names, which
must be checked from other sources. It makes one extraordinary
statement: "The younger house of the Ardens were Lords of _Upton in
Warwickshire_, and grew to be surnamed Uptons. The heire generall of
them was married to one Fenne of Banburie, who, removing his dwelling to
Hungerford in Wiltshire, was there called by the name of Moeles, of whom
the Moeles, ancestors to the Lord Hungerford, seem to be descended." It
gives the coat of arms as, Chequy or and azure, a chevron ermine.

Stow MS. 692 contains the arms of the gentry and the grants by Sir
Christopher Barker, 1536-49. Among these are: "Ardern goules, a cheff
engrayled and three cross crosslets fitchee in gold. Ardern silver, a
fesse chequy, gold and azur between three cressards gules. Arderne, Sir
Robert, Ermine a fesse or and azur, Warwickshire." Among the grants is
one to William Arderne, of Struton, Oskellyswade, Bedford, Clerk of the
Market to the King's most honourable household. It omits the shield and
only gives, "Crest a boar quarterly, gold and silver and Fleurs de luce,
goules." As the Park Hall Ardens had a boar on their crest, he may have
claimed connection.

In Dugdale's account of Clodshalle's Chantry, near Birmingham, he says
it was founded by Walter de Clodshalle of Saltley, 4 Edward III. The
patronage remained with the Clodshalles until Robert Arden's marriage to
Elizabeth Clodshalle. Robert Arden, arm., was patron in 1441, 1449,
1455; Walter Ardern, arm., in 1468, 1469, 1489; John Ardern de Lee
Lodge, presented in 1510; and Nicholas Cotterell, of Yardley, co. Wig.,
through concession of Thomas Ardern, 1537.

According to Dugdale, Upton was possessed by the Ardens in Henry II.,
one Haraldus filius Gunfridi having made sale to Godfrey de Arden, a
monk of Coventry, and son to Siward de Arden, of certain lands for the
Monastery. In Richard I., Thomas de Ardern granted certain lands there
to the canons of St. Sepulchre's, Warwick. A family who _assumed_ their
name from their residence there held it of the Ardens, but Thomas de
Ardern sold it to Guy de Gyllebrok, who passed it to Will. de Beauchamp,
Earl of Warwick.

Page 181.--Pedimore, Warwickshire, on the Ebroke, at the north of the
Tame, was the chief seat of the Ardens at one time, but was allowed to
go to ruin when the family settled at Park Hall on the south side of the
river. It was all levelled except its double moat by Dugdale's time.

Pedmore, Worcestershire, where "Mistress Joyce Arden" died in 1557, was
part of the possessions of Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Clodeshalle,
which she brought to Robert Arden, of Park Hall, 4 Henry VI., 1425. He
died, seized of Pedmore, Yardly and Stockton, Worcestershire, 3 Henry
VI., 1453. There are entered as residents William Arden, 1455, John
Arden, 1468-83, Thomas Arden, 1530, Edward Arden. But in the State
Papers Edward's brother Francis was entered as "Francis Arden of
Pedmore," in 1583, at the time of the attainder, so it may have been
granted him as a second residence, or it may have been the ruinous old
home in Warwickshire he held. The registers here prove that Robert,
Edward's heir, was residing here, and already married, before 1578, an
important point to be noted in the family history.

Page 183.--Simon in Longcroft, according to Shaw, used the Arden arms
with a difference, the arms being "Ermine a fesse chequy G. and B. Crest
on a Chapeau, Erm. and Gu., a boar passant or." At the north end of the
village of Longcroft was an old half-timbered house, which was purchased
by John of Wisbeach, who died 1709, and thus became the property of the
family of Longcroft.

Page 187.--Shaw mentions the tombstones: "Henry Arden died 1674"; "Henry
Arden died 1698, aged 24"; "Humphrey Arden died 1705, aged 74; Elizabeth
his daughter died 1689, aged 21; Katharine, his eldest daughter, died
1722; John Arden died 1709, aged 84."

Henry Arden died 1728, and Anna his wife and Catherine his twin sister.
The stone erected by John, his son. "John died 1734, aged 40; Anna
Catherina, wife of John Arden, and daughter of John Newton of King's
Bromley, died 1727, aged 29." "Also to the memory of Anne, second wife,
daughter of Rev. John Spateman, died 1764, without issue, aged 67."

"Henry Arden, 1782, aged 59. Alethea, his wife, daughter of Robert
Cotton, Esq., died 1783, aged 60."

Clement Fisher, of Wincot, married as his second wife Elizabeth,
daughter of Humphrey Arden.

(MS. notes in British Museum; copy of Shaw's "Staffordshire.")

Page 189.--The Rev. Robert Arden, of Lapworth, might have been one of
the six unnamed younger children of the Robert executed during the Wars
of the Roses.

Nicholaa was widow of William de Boutvilein when she married Sir Robert
de Arderne de Draiton. After her husband's death she was involved in a
contest with Robert de Wyckham about the presentation to the church of
Swaldyve. There is no doubt that the name on the seal mentioned in the
last line of p. 189 is in the masculine genitive; but I am inclined to
believe that the die-cutter made a mistake, and that it was really the
seal of Nicholaa.

Page 193.--In Blomfield's account of Bawsey, Norfolk, he states that it
belonged to the family of Glanville in 6 Richard I. "Thomas de Ardern
and Ralph, son of Robert, impleaded Sir William de Auberville and Maude
his wife for their portion in Bawsey and Glosthorp." Maud, the eldest
daughter of Ralph de Glanville, married Sir William de Auberville;
Amabil, the second, married Ralph de Arden; and Helewise married Robert
FitzRalph de Middleham, Yorkshire (Blomfield's "Norfolk," viii.
341-342).

Page 194.--John Arderne was a priest at Oxburgh in 1386 (Blomfield's
"Norfolk," vi. 191). Mortimer's Chapel, Attleborough. A benefactor
thereto was John Arderne, buried therein 1479. Other entries may concern
his descendants. Sir Edward Warenne, of Boton, in 1365 married Cecily,
daughter and coheir of Sir Nicholas de Eton, widow of John, son and heir
of Sir John Ardern (ix. 370). John Arderne, Rector of Brinton 1452 (ix.
370). Isolda de Arderne presented to Plasset and Attleborough in King
John's time (i. 503, 523). She was a benefactress to the Abbey of
Windham (ii. 516, 525). She was a daughter of Alured de Plesseto, and
left her body to be buried at Windham, and benefactions to the Abbey,
with the consent of William de Arderne, her son. Thurston Holland, of
Denton, married Jane, daughter of John Ardern, of Hawarden (i. 342).
Elizabeth, Duchess of Norfolk, presented Robert Arderne to the Rectory
of Aldeburgh (149), and at his death, 1504, gave it to Will Taylor (v.
353). Peter Arderne trustee for John Copputdike, of Witlingham, in 1432
(v. 456).

Page 196.--In relation to the Cheshire Ardens, Burke says that "the
elder branch of Ardens became extinct by the death of Walkelin Ardern,
_temp._ Richard II. Sir John Arden, younger brother, became head of the
family. A younger branch of Arderns settled at Alderley (Edward III.),
and ended in a few descents in a female heir, who married into the
Weever family, whose heiress married the ancestor of Sir J. Stanley. The
Ardernes of Leicestershire descended from Thomas, the younger son of Sir
Ralph Arderne of Harden, 1420, and brother of John of Harden." This is
confusing and unsatisfactory.

Page 199.--Does the following notice refer to this Thomas Arden of
Elford, etc.? "Thomas de Arderne, Chivaler, who was in Gascony in the
retinue of Ed. Prince of Acquitaine and Wales, had letters of protection
granted him for a year, Feb. 13, 1367.--Vascess. Roll, 41 Edward III."
(sent me by a member of the family).

Page 201.--In reading through the books of the Haberdashers' Company, I
find that "William Arden of Timporley, co. Cestr., Armiger, apprenticed
John Wigge 1583."

Page 202.--Debrett states that Baron Alvanley descended from Ailwin de
Arden. Vincent's "Cheshire Collections" state that he descended from
Ralph de Hampton. Ormerod disagrees with both.

"Mrs. Anne Goldsmith, of Nantwich, Chester, left a legacy to her
grandson, John Arden, 1709" (Marshall's "Genealogist," ii.).

Page 204.--The letters of the Rev. Thomas Arden, 1472, are among the
MSS. of the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury.

Page 205.--John Arderne is mentioned in the Inquisition Post-Mortem of
Edward Green, 18 Henry VII., as owning property in London.

Page 207.--The Visitation of Surrey gives "the Ardens' Arms as Azure,
the sun in splendour, argent," but it does not mention the family.

Page 210.--In the Haberdashers' books I found: "Ralphe Arderne, son of
Robert Ardern de Berwick-sup-Twede, in co. Northumberland, gen.,
apprenticed to Edmund Walden, Citizen and Haberdasher, for 8 years from
Christmas, 1589" (October 30, 1589).

Page 211.--Edmond Yate, of Bockland, Berks, Arm., appears as a surety in
1583, in the Haberdashers' books.

Page 213.--Gerard says: "John of Arderne hath set down a composition for
wounds, etc., from Alkanet" (Gerard's "Herbal," 1597, p. 657).

Page 214.--"Yorkshire. Thomas Crake m. Jane, d. and coheir of Thomas
Arden of Marton" ("Visitation of Yorkshire," 1564).

An Agnes Arden married John Middleton, son of Sir John Middleton, of
Stockeld Park, co. Yorkshire ("Visitation of Essex," 1588). She
afterwards became the second wife of Sir Thomas More, and her arms may
be seen on the Chelsea tomb--Ermine a fesse chequy (_Notes and Queries_,
4th Series, iv. 61; _Gent. Mag._, 1833, ii. 481-486).

Sir Edmund Talbot married Agnes, third daughter and coheiress of John
Arderne, of Nether Derwind, co. Lancaster, and quartered the arms of the
Cheshire Ardens. (See Dugdale's "Visitation of Yorkshire," 1665; Surtees
Society's Publications, 1859, vol. xxvi., p. 239.)

Several notices of the name occur in the _Yorkshire Archaeological
Journal_, vol. xi., p. 392; vol. xii., p. 212, etc.

Page 215.--Among "the Recusants, 1717," is mentioned Anne Arden, widow
of John Arden, late of Grafton, co. Worcester, gentleman.

Page 216.--"Visitation of Shropshire": William de Chettleton, Arm., m.
Katharine, d. of Sir John Ardern. Elizabeth, d. of Reginald Corbet, of
Stoke, Justice of the King's Pleas, mar. Robert Arden, of Park Hall.
Katharine Arden, daughter of John Arden, who married Richard Muklowe, of
Hodon. William Wall married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Ardren, of
Billingsley, in co. Salop.

The "Visitation of Suffolk," notes: "In the shield of Lady Elizabeth
Morrison, daughter of Nicholas Clerk, of Weston, in Oxfordshire, the
Ardern arms are quartered, a Fesse chequy or and azure, at Great Saxham,
Suffolk."

The will of Robert Arden of Maggotifilde, Gloucester, was proved in 1560
(11 Loftes), and that of Robert Arden of Westtray, Charlton, co.
Gloucester, 1583 (24 Rowe, Somerset House).

"Visitation of Derbyshire," 1569-1611: Robert Ratcliffe of Mellon's 2nd
wife was Jane, daughter of Perkin Ardren:

From Musgrave's "Obituary" (Harleian Publications):

     Rev. R. Crewe Arden, of Tarporley, Lancashire, brother of
     the Master of the Rolls, August 25, 1787 (_G.M._, 838).

     Rev. James Arden, Dean of Chester, F.R.S. 1668, September
     18, 1691 (Carter's "Cambridge," 1235; Neve's "Fasti," 344).

     James Arden, Captain in the Army, February 24, 1771 (_L.M._,
     175; _G.M._, 142).

     Mary Arden, aunt of Sir Richard P. Arden, the Master of the
     Rolls, August 17, 1788 (_G.M._, 758; _E.M._, 152).

     Robert Arden, proctor at Oxford (Clar., 1486; Pointer's
     "Oxford," 223).

     Rev. Robert, Preb. Worcester, October 25, 1768 (_G.M._,
     542).

     John Ardern, Harden, Cheshire, May 27, 1703, aet. 40, (Neve's
     "Mon.," 64).

     Richard Arderne, proctor, Oxford (Clar., 1538; Pointer's
     "Oxford," 226).

     William Arderon, F.R.S. 1745, at Norwich, November 25, 1767
     (_L. M._, 687; _G. M._, 610).

     Sir John Ardon, K.B., 1399.

Arden wills preserved at Lichfield:

     1541. Margery Arden.

     1552. Thomas Arden, of Long Itchington (39).

     1561. William Ardren (22).

     1562. Henry Arden (29).

     1563. Christian Arden, admin. (45).

     1575. William Arden (64).

     1608. George Ardron, of Barlborough, admin.

     1616. Sir Henry Arden, Knight, admin. (80).

     1616. Richard Arden (182).

     1625. Dame Dorothy Arderne, admin. (306).

     1625. Ambrose Arden, Esq. (7).

     1634. Humphrey Arden (inv.).

     1635. Robert Arden, Esq.

     1647. Joan Arden, of Enville.

Berkshire wills:

     1578. Edith Arden, Hampton Turvil, Wilts, admin.

     1641. Richard Arden, of Chilton.

It may interest some to have the following unrecorded entries:

From the register of St. Bridget's or St. Bride's, Fleet Street, London:

     "Marriages: John Hoare and Agnes Arden, 27 June, 1596."

     "John Arderne and Dennis Harsted by lycence, 8 Nov., 1609."

From the register of St. Martin-in-the-Fields:

     "Johannes Arden duxit Juditham Battersby per. lic. 24 Nov.,
     1638."

From the register of St. Clement's Danes, London, in the Strand:

     "Marriages: Edward Arden and Mary Waulkner, 11th Nov.,
     1587."

     "Hamond Rightwood and Elizabeth Arden, 3 Dec., 1618."

     "John Foxwell and Mary Arden, 12th July, 1629."

     "Baptisms: Thomas Arden, son of Thomas and Anne, 20th July,
     1627."

     "Guy Arden, son of Thomas Arden and Anne, uxor, 9th Oct.,
     1632."

     "Burials: Elizabeth Arden, daughter of Thomas, 25th March,
     1629."

     "Alethia Arden, daughter of John, 21 Feb., 1617."

Also from the Diocese of Bath and Wells (Harleian Publications):

"Marriage Licenses: Thomas Arden of Lopen, bachelor, and Elizabeth
Plumer of same, spinster, 10th March, 1755."

Bishop of London's Marriage Licenses:

     "Rich. Bromfield and Jone Aorden of St. Margaret's,
     Westminster, Feb. 4, 1564."

     "Jan. 15th, 1569-70. John Ardren and Elizabeth Lee 'Puella'
     of St. Andrew's, Holborn, to marry there."

     "Nov. 9, 1641. Hugh Phillips gent of Westminster, and
     Elizabeth Arden, to marry at St. Faith's."

     "December 22, 1623. Luke Yates of St. Sepulchre's, and
     Frances Arden, d. of ---- Arden of Whethamstead, Herts."

     "June 15, 1639. John Arden and Dorothy Hazard of
     Westminster."

     "Feb. 22, 1664. Henry Arden of Chelmsford and Mary Boosie."

     "Oct. 16. 1664. Thomas Arden of Westminster and Theodosia
     Long of Parmenter, co. Kent."

     "William Ardrene Junior of St. Martin's, Ludgate, gent., and
     Mrs. Alice Smith of Great Wigborough, Essex, widow. March
     21, 1665-6."

Mar. Allegations, Reg. Vic. Gen. Cant.:

     "William Elwes of St. Clement's Danes and Mrs. Dionysia
     Arden of same at St. Saviour's, Southwark, Surrey. Ap. 14,
     1688."[585]

     "John Arden of St. James, Westminster, and Mrs. Elizabeth
     Wright of St. Paul's, Covent Garden, Jan. 12, 1687, married
     at Westminster Abbey."

     "John Arden of St. Giles-in-the-Fields, gent., and Mrs. Anne
     Ratcliffe, Sept. 28, 1691."

     "Francis Marlow of Westham, co. Essex, and Bridget Arden of
     St. Sepulchre's, London, September 16, 1674."


Register of St. James, Clerkenwell, Burials: "Feb. 14, 1688. Ellinor
Arden."

     "Marriages: Jan. 11, 1561-2. John Arden and Anne Phillips."

     "Sept. 15, 1596. Thomas Jerome, and Helen Arden."

     "Christenings: March 6, 1712. Ann, d. of Richard Ardin and
     Elizabeth his wife."

     "Jan. 29, 1685-6. James, son of Christopher, and Elizabeth
     Ardon."

     "June 25, 1676. Mary, d. of Robert and Jane Arden."

Registers of St. George's, Hanover Square:

     "Marriages: May 14, 1757. John Hutchins and Miriam Arden,
     Lic."

     "October 30, 1786. Thomas Ardren, and Elizabeth Head."

     "August 5, 1786. Samuel Ardron, and Mary Bellamy Higdon."

     "March 19, 1787. Thomas Oliver, and Susannah Ardrenn."

     "Hon. Thomas Walpole and the Right Hon. Margaret Perceval.
     Spec. Lic. Witnesses Lord Arden, H. Walpole, and M. E.
     Arden."

     "Sep. 3, 1788. William Carter and Mary Ardren."

     "Sep. 29, 1811. John Exley Adams and Anna Maria Arden, Lic.,
     Oct. 24, 1811."

     [At the marriage of H. F. Compton Cavendish and Sarah
     Fawkenor, a witness is Catharine Emma Arden. Also Lord
     Walpole to Mary Fawkenor, July 23, 1812, witnesses Catharine
     Emma Arden and Henrietta Arden.]

     "Dec. 28, 1815. John Ardin and Sarah West."

     "Feb. 12, 1832. James Ardren and Harriet Pugh."

     [B. R. Arden witness to marriage of Rich. Pennefather and
     the Rt. Hon. Lady Emily Georgiana Butler, July 26, 1836.
     Lord Arden witness to Charles Scrase Dickins and the Rt.
     Hon. Frances Elizabeth Compton, Feb. 18, 1829.]

Registers of St. Dionis, Backchurch:

     "Marriages: October 16, 1653. Edmund Webberley and Elizabeth
     Ardourne."

     "Dec. 13, 1694. John Arden of St. Faith's, London, and Grace
     Lansdale of the same Parish."

     "Oct. 27, 1696. Humphrey Arden of Rotherhithe co. Surrey,
     and Elizabeth Page of St. John's, Wapping."

Registers of St. George, Hyde Park Corner:

     "May 7, 1750. John Pearce of Westminster and Mary Arden of
     St. Margaret's, Westminster."

     "Jan. 12, 1752. William Houghton and Susannah Arden of St.
     James, Westminster."

     "June 14, 1753. James Ardern and Elizabeth Bath."

Registers of St. Paul's:

     "Nott Fettiplace, Esq., of the Middle Temple, London, and
     Anna Catherina Arden of Longcroft Hall in the County of
     Stafford, were married by Licence by me in this Cathedral.
     Thomas Spateman, 15th Nov., 1753."

Registers of St. Thomas Apostle, London:

     "Burial: Thomas Arden, December 11, 1750."

Registers of Kensington Parish:

     "Christenings: July 8th, 1649. Elizabeth daughter of John
     and Mary Ardin."

     "July 24, 1642. Thomas, s. of John and Mary Ardin."

     "Dec. 29, 1644. Thomas, s. of John and Mary Ardin."

     "March 14, 1646. Mary, daughter of John and Mary Arden."

     "Feb. 15, 1651. Christening: Edward son of John and Mary
     Arden."

     "March 27, 1653. James, son of John and Mary Arden."

     "March 27, 1640. Richard, son of John and Mary Arden."

     "April 16, 1656. Daniell, son of John and Mary Arden, at
     Brompton (buried Nov. 9th, 1656)."

Registers of St. Antholin:

     "Marriage: June 22, 1578. Roger Cumber and Joyce Arden."

Christ Church, Newgate Street:

     "Burial: Anne Arden, a prisoner, Jan. 31, 1733."

Registers of St. Michael's, Cornhill:

     "Marriage: June 8, 1675. John Arden and Elizabeth Briscoe,
     by Lic."

     "Robert Ardone and Agnes Holder, Aug. 29, 1565."

     "Christenings: Dec. 6th, 1670. Thomas, son of John Arden and
     Mary his wife, Dec. 6, 1670."

     "Richard, son of John Arden and Mary his wife, Dec. 20,
     1672."

     "Aug. 20, 1683. Alice, daughter of John Arderne and
     Elizabeth his wife."

     "May 25, 1686. Ralph, s. of John Ardern and Elizabeth his
     wife."

     "Burials: Sept. 9, 1674. Mary, d. of John Arden and Mary his
     wife."

     "Thomas, son of John Arden the Parish Clerk in the
     Churchyard, Ap. 24, 1679."

     "Thomas Arden, a Stranger, in the Cloister, May 20, 1705."

Chancery Proceedings in reign of James I.:

     B.A., 2, 8. Arderne _v._ Arderne.

     B.A., 5, 70. Arden _v._ Askrigg.

     B.A., 7, 49. Arden _v._ Biddulph and others.

     B.A., 8, 16. Ardern et al. _v._ Rysbrook et al.

     B.A., 9, 28. Arden _v._ Hodges et al.

     B.A., 10, 26. Arden _v._ Hodges.

     B.A., 4, 13. Ardern _v._ Greenfield, etc.

     B.B., 20, 28. Browne Mil. _v._ Arden et al.

     Will in the Public Record Office, 5 G.T., p. 20: "No. 8.
     John Arden, 16 May, 1718."

FOOTNOTES:

[581] Robert Arden purchased another tenement from him and his wife
Agnes in 1619.

[582] Robert Arden purchased another tenement from John Palmer in 1529.

[583] Adam Palmer and Hugh Porter were trustees for Robert's settlements
on his daughters.

[584] In St. Mary's, Warwick, a marble monument bears similar arms
sacred to the memory of "Franciscus Chernocke of gen. antiqua. Baronet
cognominum in com. Bedford, familia oriundus. Obiit 1727, aet. 69."

[585] Lieutenant, R.N.; died, _s.p._, 1691. Mrs. Elwes died, _s.p._,
1718 (Marshall's "Genealogist," i. 149).




INDEX


Abel, Margaret, 173

Abell, Agnes, 173

Abington, 105

Adams, John Exley, 237

Addenbroke, John, 76, 117

Adderley, Sir Charles, 181
  Lady Anne, 181

Ailwin, 32, 165, 234

Albans, St., Hall, 15

Alcester, 10, 14, 122

Alcock, Anne, 186

Alcokkes, John, 30, 223

Alderley, 198, 200
  Nether, 199, 200

Aldford, 197, 198, 199

Aldford, Richard de, 197

Alfred, King, vi, 163

Allen _v._ Burbage, 224

Alleyn, 34

Allon, Thomas, 150

Altcar, 171

Alvanley, 197, 198, 199, 201-202

Amabilia, 167
  de Glanville, 192, 233

Amicia, 167

Andrew, Mary, 175
  Sir Thomas, 175

Appowell, John, 218

Archer, Joan, 160
  Margaret, 93
  Sir Richard, 160

Archivists, Society of, 3

Archy's "Banquet of Jests," 84

ARDEN, ARDERNE, or DE ARDEN
  Adam, 195, 215
  Sir Adam, 213
  Adela, 166
  Adeliza, 167
  Agnes, 166, 173, 196, 208, 218, 220
  Agnes, of Wilmecote, m. (1) Hewyns, (2) Stringer, 36, 37, 40, 49,
  Agnes Webbe, m. (1) Hill, (2) Arden, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 44, 45, 223
    Her will, 39, 40, 41, 223
  Alethea, 186, 232, 236
  Alexander, 196, 219
  Alianore, 170
  Alice, 209, 216, 220, 230, 238
  Alice of Wilmecote, 37, 38, 39, 40, 43, 44, 49
  Alicia, 168, 188, 219, 230
  Amabilia, 167
  Amabilia de Glanville m. Ralph de Hampton, 192, 233
  Ambrose, 186, 235
  Amicia, 167
  Amy, 208
  Anna, 232
  Anna Catharine, 187, 238
  Anna Maria, 237
  Anne, 172, 177, 181, 186, 202, 219, 221, 234, 236, 237, 238
  Anthony, 209, 210, 211
  Arthur, 182
  Aveline, 196
  Barbara, 177
  Beatrix, 230
  Benjamin, 186
  B. R., 237
  Bridget, 177, 211, 218, 236
  Catharine, 178, 202, 232, 238
  Catharine Emma, 237
  Cecilia, 166, 167, 200, 220
  Charles, 201
  Christian, 183, 235
  Christopher, 237
  Cicely, 176, 202
  Daniell, 238
  Dionysia, Mrs., 236
  Dorothy, 181, 235
  Edith, 207, 235
  Edmund, 188, 211, 213
  Edward, 30, 64, 94, 176, 208, 221, 230, 232, 236, 238
  Edward, of Park Hall, 1532-1583. 30, 64, 94, 177, 178, 179,
      180, 183, 184, 185
  Eleanor, 49, 170, 171, 209, 230, 231
  Elena, 169, 170, 194, 196
  Elizabeth, 170, 172, 176, 181, 182, 186, 206, 208, 219, 236, 237, 238
    Mistress, 182
  Ellinor, 237
  Eustace, 196, 197
  Eustachia, 167, 195
  Felicia or Phillis, 163, 164, 167
  Frances, 177, 182, 186, 201, 236
  Francis, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 184, 221
  Fraunces, 177
  Galfridus, 167
  Geoffrey, 170, 194
  George, 176, 184, 202, 209, 235
  Giles, Sir, 160, 169, 220
  Godfrey, 232
  Goditha, 181, 221
  Guy, 204, 205, 211, 236
  Harald, 165
  Hawisia, 190, 196
  Helen, 237
  Henry, 26, 49, 166, 167, 168, 169, 171, 172, 181, 186, 187,
      188, 189, 209, 211, 219, 220, 232, 235, 236
  Henry, Sir, of Park Hall, 169, 181, 195, 198, 235
  Henrietta, 237
  Heraud, 164
  Herbert, 167
  Hugh, 166, 178, 190, 201, 216, 220
  Hugh de Vienna, 167
  Isabel, 199, 200, 209
  Isabella, 217, 220
  Isolda, 233
  James, Rev. Dean, 201, 235
  James, Captain, 235
  James, 219, 237
  Jane, 177, 181, 186, 196, 214, 218, 234, 235
  Joan, 168, 172, 207, 235
  Joan, of Wilmecote, m. Lambert, 36, 37, 39, 49
  Johane, 207, 211
  Johanna, 168, 220
  John, 169, 171, 172, 176, 182, 185, 188, 190, 195, 196, 197,
      198, 199, 201, 202, 203, 205, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212,
      213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 229, 230, 231,
      232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237
  John, Sir, Park Hall, Esquire of the Body, 26, 49, 170, 171,
      172, 173, 174, 184, 223, 230, 231, 232, 234, 236
  John, Sir, 169, 233
  John, of Pepper Hall, 202
  John, Clerk of the Works, 202, 203
  John, of Newark, 213
  John, of Wisbeach, 186, 232
  Jone, 236
  Joseph, 166
  Joyce, 41, 176, 177, 238
  Joyce, of Wilmecote, 36, 37, 40, 41, 43, 49, 111, 181
  Joyce, Mistress, 41, 181, 232
  Judith, 182
  Katharine, 203, 204, 205, 209, 230, 231, 234
  Katharine, of Wilmecote, m. Edkins, 36, 37, 49
  Laurence, 212
  Leonard the priest, 209
  Letitia, 167
  Leverunia, 165
  Lucia, 168
  Margaret, 166, 169, 178, 183, 198, 200, 209, 212, 214, 216, 220
  Margaret, of Wilmecote, m. Webbe, 36, 37, 224
  Margery, 198, 211, 214
  Martin, 26, 27, 32, 49, 171, 172, 173
  Mary, 175, 178, 179, 180, 185, 195, 196, 209, 213, 221, 231,
      235, 237, 238, 239
  Mary, of Wilmecote, m. Shakespeare, 22, 23, 24, 25, 28, 31,
      32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 45, 49, 51, 60, 175, 180
  Matilda, 200
  Maud, 199
  Miriam, 237
  Muriel, 178, 180
  Mr., of Feversham, 217
    Mrs., 180, 217, 221
    M. E., 237
  Nicholaa, 168, 169, 190, 195, 233
  Nicholas, 189, 190, 208, 233
  Oliva, 167, 190
  Osbert, 166, 167, 230
  Perkin, 235
  Peter, 166, 167, 170, 190, 191, 197, 198, 199, 201, 202, 203, 214, 221
  Peter, Sir, of Latton, 203, 204, 205, 206, 221
  Philip, 167
  Pierce, 213
  Ralph, 168, 169, 170, 186, 194, 195, 201, 214, 215, 216, 222, 233, 234,
      238
  Ralph, of Hampton, 166, 190, 191, 192, 193, 234
  Ralph, Sir, of Park Hall, 168, 169
  Ralph, Sir, of Hornden, 215
  Richard, 167, 188, 190, 191, 202, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210,
      213, 216, 220, 221, 235, 238
  Richard Pepper, Baron Alvanley, 202, 234, 237
  Robert, 166, 168, 169, 170, 172, 173, 176, 178, 180, 181,
      182, 189, 190, 194, 195, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 218, 219,
      221, 233, 235, 237, 238
  Robert, of Berwick-upon-Tweed, 234
    of Cottesford, 209, 210
    of Henley, 211
    de Draiton, 168, 233
    of Lapworth, Rector, 189, 233
    of Park Hall, 26, 27, 46, 49, 170, 181, 182, 184, 185, 194,
      195, 216, 232, 233
    of Norfolk, 213
  Robert, of Wilmecote, 22, 25, 27, 29, 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 43,
      45, 49, 50, 175, 180, 184
       His will, 37, 38
  Robert, of Yoxall, 171, 172, 173, 189
  Roger, 190, 191
  R. Crewe, Rev., 235
  Rose, 167, 168, 169
  Samuel, 237
  Sibilla, 170
  Simon, 31, 174, 176, 178, 181, 183, 184, 185, 232
    of Longcroft, 175
  Siward, 168
  Susannah, 237
  Thomas, 167, 168, 171, 172, 176, 178, 188, 190, 191, 192,
      195, 199, 200, 201, 202, 204, 205, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211,
      212, 213, 214, 216, 217, 219, 220, 221, 222, 228, 229, 230,
      231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238
  Thomas de Draiton, 168
  Thomas de Hanwell, 167, 168, 169
    of Long Itchington, 173, 188
    of St. Martin's, Outwich, 173, 218
    of Park Hall, 26, 27, 31, 35, 172, 173, 175, 176, 177, 178,
      183, 184, 231
  Thomas, of Wilmecote, 24, 26, 27, 29, 31, 32, 35, 45, 46, 49,
      174, 175, 184, 222, 223
  Thomas, son of Walter, 171, 172
  Timothy, 215
  Turchil, 165, 166, 167
  Ursula, 177
  Ursuley, 177
  Virgil, 208
  Walkeline, 197, 199, 200, 233
  Walter, of Park Hall, 26, 27, 28, 35, 49, 170, 174, 208, 215, 230, 231
     His will, 26, 170, 171
  William, 26, 32, 49, 166, 167, 168, 170, 171, 172, 175, 176,
      183, 184, 186, 188, 189, 190, 191, 193, 195, 202, 205, 209,
      210, 214, 215, 216, 219, 230, 232, 233, 234, 235
  William, son of Thomas of Park Hall, his will, 176, 177
  William, of Hawnes, 172, 173, 175, 216, 231

Ardens' Arms, The, 26, 31, 32, 33, 168, 169, 174, 175, 176,
    179, 182, 189, 190, 193, 196, 198, 201, 202, 209, 216, 217,
    221, 223, 230, 231, 232, 234, 235
  Impalement of the, 24, 25, 31, 32, 33, 175, 223

Ardens, The, 161, 162, 174, 178, 181, 194, 201, 216, 222, 223

Ardens, The, of Alvanley, 197
  Bedfordshire, 32, 216
  Burnham, Bucks, 217
  Cheshire, 31, 32, 196, 197, 234
  Cottesford, 209, 210
  Essex, 215
  Feversham, Tragedy of, 217
  Kent, 217
  Kirtlington, 209
  London, 217, 220, 236
  Longcroft, 183
  Oxfordshire, 209, 211, 212
  Park Hall, 25, 26, 28, 31, 32, 33, 36, 40, 41, 45, 58, 162,
      169, 175, 209, 222
  Victoria, 221
  Warwickshire, 188, 189, 190, 191
  Wilmecote, 28, 31, 33, 35, 36
  Yorkshire, 214

Ardeney, Alice, 181

Arden's Grafton, 189

Arderon, William, 235

Armyn, Robert, 73

Arthgal, 230

Asbies, 37, 40, 41, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 56, 57, 62, 71, 223

Ashby, 134

Ashwell, John, 119

Astley, Isabella, Prioress of Wroxall, 11

Aston Cantlow, 27, 31, 39, 40, 51, 174, 175, 222

Athelstan, King, vi, 33

_Athenaeum_, 25, 64, 66, 139, 179, 226

Atkins or Edkins, Richard, 30, 223

Atwood, Thomas, 113

Auberville, Matilda de, 93, 232
  William de, 93, 232

Averne, Anne, 124


Babthorpe, Margaret, 200
  Sir Robert, 200

Baconians, The, 17, 121

Baddesley Clinton, 6, 7, 11, 124, 130

Badger, George, 59

Bagley, Edward, 106, 107, 108

Bagleys, The, 226

Bagot, Hervey, 181
  Dorothy, 181

Baker's "Northampton," 168, 189, 196

Balsall, 7, 14, 119, 124

Barbor, John, 9

Barber, Thomas le, 219

Barker, Herald, Sir Christopher, 216, 231
  Thomas, 59

Barking, 140

Barnards, The, 105, 109

Barnard, Sir John, 104, 105, 106, 109
  Lady Elizabeth, 103, 105, 109, 226

Barnesley, John, 177
  Anne, 177

Barnet, James, 151

Barston, 13

Barton, 186

Barton-on-the-Heath, 45, 48, 57

Basnet, Mr., 122

Basse, Master John, 205
  William, 84

Bath, Elizabeth, 237

Battersby, Judith, 236

Bawdsey, or Bawsey, 233

Bearley, 36, 37

Beauchamps, de, or Bellocampo, 27, 31, 46, 167, 168, 174, 175
  Arms, 167, 174, 175
  Alicia de, 168
  Elizabeth, 46, 174, 222
  Joan, 170, 197
  Lady, of Bergavenny, 46, 170
  Lord, of Bergavenny, 174
  Maud, 167
  Richard, Earl of Worcester, 174, 221
  Thomas, 169, 174, 221
  William, 167, 174, 221, 232

Beaumont, 84
  His poems, 86

Beaupre, 176
  Elizabeth, 176

Bedfordshire, 26, 32, 172

Belknap, Edward, 171

Bell in Carter Lane, 69

Bellomont, Roger de, Earl of Mellent, 166

Benfield, Swanston and Pollard _v._ Burbage, 70, 71, 81

Berewood Hall, 178

Berkshire, 132

Berkswell, 13, 124

Berry's "Genealogies," 168, 202

Beverston Register, 87

Bevis, Sir, of Hampton, 163

Bibbesworth, Thomas, 204

Bickley, Mr. W.B., 7, 28, 35

Biddle, Anne, 228

Bigsby, Dr., 109

Billesley, 27, 29, 35, 104

Bilton, 188
  Birmingham, 35, 130, 131

Birt, John, 136

Blackfriars' tenement, 76, 80, 107
  Theatre, 70, 76

Blagrove, John, 158

Blaxton, Rev. Mr., 212

Blomfield's "Norfolk," 193, 214, 233

Blount, John Henry, 132

Bodleian Library, 22

Bohun, Anne, 203
  John, 203
    D.A., 191

Boles, Rev. Mr., 97
  Christian, 183
  Thomas, 183

Boosie, Mary, 219, 236

Bordesley, 14, 21

Botecourt, Sir John de, 169

Boteler, John, 171

Boulogne, Earl Eustace of, 215

Bouton, Sir William, Curate, 38, 223

Boutvilein, Nicholaa de, 169
  William de, 169

Bowes, Mr., of King's College, 205

Bowles, Anne, 172
  Richard, 172

Bracebridges, The, of Kingsbury, 167
  Alice, 172
  John, 171
  Peter, 167
  Richard, 172

Bradshaw, George, executed, 217

Bratt, Mr. Robert, 55

Brayley's "Surrey," 207

Braylys, Geys, 173
  Thomas, 173

Brearley, Thomas, 130

Bredon, Worcestershire, 132

Brewer, Anne, 150

Bridge's "Northampton," 196

Brigide's, St., Church, 149, 176, 226, 235

Briscoe, Elizabeth, 238

Bristol Wills, 139

Broadspear, 2

Brodesley, 178

Broke, Simon, Clerk, 173

Brome, Beatrice, 11
  Jocosa, Prioress, 11, 12
  John, 11
  Nicholas, 11
  Thomas, 11

Bromfield, Richard, 218, 236

Brook, Ralph, York Herald, 22, 24, 25

Brown, daughter, 173
  John, 57, 219

Brownlow pedigree, 177

Bucknall, Thomas Skip Dyott, 156
  Harriet Sophia, 156

Budbrook, 11, 115, 124, 126, 177

Buklond, Alice, 171, 173, 230

Burbage, Anne, 126
  Cuthbert, 70
  James, 70, 81, 224
  Richard, 34, 36, 70, 73, 77, 80, 136
  Thomas, 81, 126, 136
  William, 70, 81
  Winifred, 70, 81

Burke's "Landed Gentry," 180, 202, 221
  "Colonial Gentry," 221

Burleigh, 180

Bushell, Mr., 69

Butler, Lady Emily Georgiana, 237

Byrdsale, William, 9


Cade, Richard, 176
  Joyce, 176

Cage, The, 91

Camden, 17, 33, 52, 84
  His "Britannia," 84

Campbell's "Lives of the Judges," 192

Campbell, Hon. John, 153
  Anne, 153

Carew, Elizabeth, 95

Carlisle, 5

Carter, Maria Anna, 143
  Thomas, 182
  William, 237

Catesby, John, 182, 205

Catheryns, Humphrey, Mr., 229

Cavendish, H. F. Compton, 237

Chacsper, Thomas, 7

Chafford, 140

Chaloner, John, 207

Chamber, William, 230

Champe, Thomas, 134

Champ, Joseph, 137

Chancery Cases, 48, 77, 121, 123, 129, 133

Charles I., a student of Shakespeare, 85, 101

Charnells, John, 26, 173
  William, 179

Charterhouse Chapel, 155

Chaucer, 84

Chaworth, Sir Thomas, 9

Chedwyns, The, 7

Chelesworthy Manor, Devon, 215

Cheney, Katharine, 209
  John, 209

Chernocke, Francis, 229

"Cheshire Collections," Vincent's, 234

Chester, Earl of, Prince of Wales, 200
  Ranulph, 196, 197

Chettle, publisher, 65

Chettleton, William de, 230

Chief, Thomas, 218

Children's Company of Actors, 70

Church End, Rowington, 13


Claredon, or Claverdon, 123, 129

Clement's Danes, St., Register, 146, 147, 148, 149, 236

Clerk, Nicholas, 235

Clifford Chambers, 119

Clifton Camvile, 199

Clinton, Henry de, Earl of Huntingdon, 174

Clodeshalle, Elizabeth, 170, 176, 231, 232
  Richard de, 170, 232
  Walter de, 231

Clopton, Barbara, 107
  Sir Hugh, 108
  Sir John, 107
  Mr., 51
  William, 45

Cockes, Elena, 12

Codd, Rev. E. T., 124

Codmore, 171
  Bailiff of, 171

Codyngton, Mr., daughters of, 206

Cokaine, Sir Aston, 186

Colbrand, 163

Cole, Henry, 50

"Colin Clout's Come Home Again," Spenser's, 2

Collier, J. P., 143

Collins, Agnes, 208
  Edith, 208
  Elizabeth, 208
  Francis, 80, 122
  Katherine, 206
  name of, 207

Colyns, Hugh, 173

Combe, John, 72, 77, 224, 225
  Mr. Thomas, 80
  Mrs., 100
  Mr. William, 78, 225

"Comedy of Errors," The, 67, 68, 224

Compton, Rt. Hon., Frances Elizabeth, 237

Compton, Philip, 167

Compton Winyate, 166

Condell, Henry, 70, 73, 77, 80, 81

Conway, Edward, 176
  Elizabeth, 176
  Sir John, 177, 179
  Lord, 85

Cooke, Gilbert the, 196

Cooke, Dr. James, 98, 99
  J., 85
  Thomasine, 139

Cooke, the Herald, 17

Corbet, Elizabeth, 138, 178, 230, 234
  Reginald, Justice, 178, 230, 234

Cornish, 41

Cornwall, Edward, 36, 41, 44, 49, 56, 114

Cotgrave, Richard de, 5

Cotesbrook Church, 195

Cotterell, Nicholas, 232

Cotton, Alethea, 187, 232
  Robert, 187, 232

Coughton, 166, 169

"Court of Virtue," Dr. John Hall's, 93

Court, Mrs. Grace, 100
  Richard, 57
  William, attorney, 57

Coventry, 5, 124, 131

Cowley, Richard, 73

Cowper, John, Under-Sheriff, 43

Cowper, Mr. J.M., 141

Coxe, Margery, 209
  Walter, 209

Crabhouse, Prioress of, 205

Croke, John, 173

Crollalanza, Goffredo di, 1

Cromwell, Lord, 216

Crosmore, Agnes, 140

Culpepper, Richard, 207

Cumber, Roger, 238

Curdworth, 166, 167, 169, 178, 179, 184

Currie, Colin, 153
  Elizabeth, 153

Cymbeline, 163


Dance, Mr. William, 136

Darcy, Edward, 180, 181, 184, 185

Daubeney, John, 211

Davenant, John, 75
  Sir William, 75

Davenport, Mary, 154, 157
  Rev. William of Bredon and Lacock Abbey, 154, 157

Davies, John, "Microcosmus, the Civil Warres of Death and Fortune," 34

Dawson, Harriet, 157

Debrett's Peerage, 234

Denbigh, Earl of, 149

Denham, Joan, 160
  Sir John, 160

Derbyshire, 136, 235

Dethick, Sir William, Garter, 17, 22

Devereux, Lady Catherine, 178, 231
  Sir Edward, 178, 231

Deye, John, 207

Dibdin's "History of the Edinburgh Stage," 73

Dickenson, Mr. C. C., 132, 141

Dickins, Charles Scrase, 237

Dier, Sir Edward, 22

Digby, Sir George, 43, 180

Digges, Leonard, 83

Dilcock, Henry, of Coventry, 5

Dimbleby, Mrs., 146

Divos, Rev. Roger, 51

Dixson, Thomas, 31

Dodde, Dorothea (Mrs. Shakespeare), 145
  Elizabeth, 145
  Jane (Mrs. Wren), 145

Domesday Book, 165

Done, John, 218

Donnelly, Hon. Ignatius, 17

Doulton, Bridget, 216

D'Oyley, Justice, 179

Dragon, The, 163

Draiton, 169

Drape, Richard, 202

Drayton, Michael, the Poet, 99, 225

Drey, Christopher, 177

Drummond's "Noble British Families," 31, 162, 163, 164, 167, 168, 201

Dudley, Ambrose, Earl of Warwick, 131

Dudley, Mr. Thomas, 211

Dudston, 178

Dugdale, Sir William, 11
  His "Monasticon," 11, 12, 113, 166
  His "Warwickshire," 11, 12, 42, 97, 104, 162, 163, 164, 167,
      168, 170, 171, 174, 175, 180, 184, 189, 190, 191, 222, 231,
      232

Duncombe, Mr., 111

Dwale, John, 8

Dyer, Rev. Mr., 111


Ealdstreet, Prebendary of (Hugh Saunders, or Shakespeare), 15

"Earliest Official Record of Shakespeare's Name," 3, 66, 224

Earwaker's "East Cheshire," 198, 199, 201, 202

Echenours, 167

Edgehill, 101

Edkyns, or Atkins, Adam, 49
  Clement, 49
  Richard, 31
  Thomas, senior, 36, 49
  Thomas, junior, 36, 49
  Walter, 31

Edmund, King, 165

Edmunds, Alice, 124

Edward I., 160

Edward the Confessor, 165
  the Elder, 162
  the Martyr, 165

Edwards, Margaret, 148

Elford, 197, 198, 199, 200

Elizabeth, Queen, 66, 139, 179

Ellerker, Sir Ralph, 214

Ellesmere, Lord, 76

Elton, Oliver, 225

Elwes, William, 236

Empson, Sir Richard, 174, 184

Engelger, 192

Ensors, The, 111, 125

Ermenhild, 163

Errors, Brooke's pamphlet of Camden's, 24, 25
  Comedy of, 67, 68, 224

Essex, Countess of, 178
  Earl of, 72
  Forest of, 4

Essex, Shakespeares of, 7, 138, 139, 140

Etchells, 199, 200

Ethelfleda, 163

Ethelred, 165

Eton, The Master of, 61

Eton, Cicely de, 233
  Nicholas de, 167, 233

Euphorbus, 68

Eustace de Arden, 196, 197

Eustachia, 167

Euston, 171

Evenley, 209, 210


Farron, William, 151

Fawkenor, Mary, 237
  Sarah, 237

Feckenham, 64

Felicia, or Phillis the Fair of Warwick, 163

Fellows, William, 151

Fenwick, Charles, 157

Fenwick, Octavia, 157

Ferne, Sir John, 17

Ferrars, Thomas, 216

Ferrers, Mr. Henry, 11, 93, 130, 131, 183

Fettiplace, Nott, Esq., 237

Field, Henry, tanner, of Stratford-on-Avon, 58
  Richard, his son, printer, of London, 65

Fielding, Basil, 181
  Dorothy, 181

Fillongley, 111, 131

Finsbury Fields, The Theatre in, 70

First folio of Shakespeare's Plays, 84

Fisher, Clement, 186, 232

Fisher, John, The Book of, 130, 224, 229

Fisher's "Forest of Essex," 4

Fitzalan, John, 168

FitzCana de Bohun, Engelger, 192
  Franco, 192
  Gelduin, 192
  Ralph, 192
  Savaric, 192

Fitzralph, Robert, de Middleham, 233

Fleay's "History of the Stage," 71
  "Life of Shakespeare," 76

Flecknoe, Christopher, 123

Fletcher, Charlotte, 157
  Giles, 94
  Joan, 94
  Lawrence, 73
  Phineas, 94

"Foedera," Rymer's, Patent to Shakespeare and others, 73, 74

Foss's "Lives of the Judges," 192, 193, 202, 203

Foxwell, John, 236

Franklin, Elizabeth, 172
  John, 172


Franklyn, Mr., 217

Freeman's "Epigrams," 34

French, G. R., "Shakespeareana Genealogica," 8, 31, 35, 46, 88, 112,
    122, 123, 133, 135, 141, 144, 160, 165, 187, 221

Freville, Baldwin, 216

Freyndon, 5

Fuller's "Worthies of England," 31, 192, 207, 209, 214, 215

Fulwood, John, 39
  Mary, 39
  Richard, 212
  Robert, 59

Furnivall, Dr. F.J., 3, 62


Galton, Mr. Francis, 160

Gamell, John, 170

Garnett, Dr. Richard, 1

Gay, Elizabeth, 143

Gaynsford, John, 205

Gearing, Agnes, 208
  Henry, 208

Gedney, John, 213

"Gentlemen of Verona," 68

George, St., 162

Gerard, Father, 212

Gerard's "Herbal," 213, 234

Getley, Walter, 72

Gibbes, George, 40, 42, 223
  Nicholas, 31

Gibbons of Oxfordshire, 171

Gifford, Isabel, 209
  John, 209

Gilbert, Sir William, Curate, 88

Gilpitts, The, 55

Glanville, Amabilia de, 192, 233
  Helewise de, 193, 233
  Matilda, or Maud de, 193, 233
  Ralph de, 192, 193, 233

Globe Theatre, 70, 77, 78, 83, 84

Glover's "Heraldry," 32, 175

Glover, William, 132

Gloucester Wills, 132

Goldsmith, Mrs. Anne, 234

Gollancz, Mr. Israel, 9

Goodwin, Mary, 151

Goodyere, Anne, The "Idea" of Drayton, 225

Gotheridge, Mary, 147

Grace, Alice, 129
  Thomas, 129

Grange, John, 153

Gray's Inn revels, 67, 224

Green, Alice, 205, 206
  Anna, 130
  Edward, 234
  Elizabeth, 205
  Margaret, 202
  Mrs., 116
  Philip, 59
  Robert, 205
  Thomas, 116, 117, 121, 130

Green, Thomas, alias Shakespeare, 76, 78, 116
  Walter, 205

Greene's "Groatsworth of Wit" and the "Upstart Crow," 65

Greenhill Street House, 51

Greenstreet, Rev. James, 224

Greenway the Carrier, 69

Greenwich, Shakespeare plays at, 66

Gregory, Rev. Mr., 212
  William, 151

Greswold, Thomas, 170

Gretwyn, Thomas, 31

Greville, Sir Edward, 59
  Sir Fulke, 25, 45, 122
  Ludovic, 169, 178

Grevilles of Drayton, 178

Grey, Lord, 9

Griffin, Agnes, 140
  Alice, 15, 140
  Edward, 15
  Francis, 15, 140

Guiderius, 163

Guildhall Library, 77, 92

Gutheridge, Mr., a Dealer in Leather, 230

Guthmund, 165

Guy of Warwick, vi, 32, 164

Guy's Cliff, 164

Guy, William, 151

Gwillim's "Display of Heraldry," 22, 87


Haberdasher's Books, The, 226, 234

Hales, Bartholomew, Lord of Manor of Snitterfield, 45

Hall, Alice, 225
  Anne, 94
  Edmund, 55, 94
  Edward, 94
  Elizabeth, 93, 94
  Elizabeth, poet's grand-daughter, 75, 79, 80, 92, 95, 99,
      100, 101, 105, 109
  Eme, 225
  Emma, 55, 94
  Hugh, 181
  Hugh, priest, 179, 180
  John, 12, 93, 94, 129, 225
  Dr. John of Maidstone, 92
  Dr. John, the poet's son-in-law, 75, 80, 81, 82, 89, 90, 91,
      92, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 101, 107, 109
    his cures, 98, 99, 100
    his epitaph, 97
  Joyce, 129
  Maria, 93
  Mr., 51, 94
  Mr. A., 95
  Rev. Dr., 212
  Richard, 93, 225
  Robert, 225
  Simon, 225
  Susanna, the poet's daughter, 77, 79, 89, 93, 95, 97, 98, 99,
      100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 226
    Her epitaph, 104
  Thomas, 94

Halls, Arms of the, 104

Halls, the, of Henwick, 94
  of Idlecote, 94
  of Warwick, 225
  of Worcester, 93

Hallen, Rev. Cornelius, 112

Halliwell-Phillipps, "Outlines of the Life of Shakespeare," 6, 10, 17,
    20, 21, 39, 41, 42, 43, 47, 49, 51, 59, 69, 72, 75, 78, 81, 93, 107,
    115, 121, 122, 224, 226

Halstead, Peter, 181

Hamilton, Fanny Isabella, 156
  Sir Robert North Collie, 156

Hammond, William, 108
  Mrs., 108

Hampden, Eleanor, 26, 49, 170
  John, 26, 49, 170

Hampton in Arden, 10, 124, 125
  Lucy, 10
  -on-Avon, 115
  Corley, 13, 115

Hanhampsted, John, 217

Harbage, Francis, 51

Harborne, John, 47

Hareley, 22

Hargrave, John, 37

Harold, 165

Harper, Catherine, 186

Harstead, Dennis, 236

Hart, George, 106
  Joan, poet's sister, 49, 54, 79, 101, 107, 109, 226
  John, 112
  Thomas, 106, 109
  William, 109, 112, 226
  William Henry, F.S.A., 4

Harts, The, 42, 61

Hartwell, Elizabeth, 143

Harveys, The Rowington, 8, 14, 226

Haselden, 214

Haseley, 10, 13, 14, 122, 124, 125

Hasted's "History of Kent," 217

"Haste-vibrans," 1

Hastings, John, 125

Hathaway, Agnes or Anne, poet's wife, 62, 63, 64, 80, 81, 83, 87, 88,
    89, 90, 99, 117, 224
    Her epitaph, 90
  Bartholomew, 88, 89
  Catherine, 88
  Elizabeth, 89, 106
  Isabel, 89
  Joan, 106
  John, 87, 88
  Judith, 89, 106
  Margaret, 88

Hathaway, Richard, 53, 62, 63, 88, 89, 224
  Rose, 106
  Susanna, 106
  Thomas, 88, 89, 106
  William, 88, 89

Hathaways, The, 87, 106, 117, 224.

Hatton, 13, 14, 124, 125, 129

Hatton, Sir Christopher, 66

Havering, 139

Hawarden, 199

Hawnes, Beds, 26, 172, 231

Hayles, James, 211

Hazard, Dorothy, 218

Head, Elizabeth, 237

Hedges, Henry, 134

Helen's, St., Parish, Bishopsgate, 142, 143

Hemings, John, 70, 73, 75, 80, 81

Henley, John, 37

Henley-on-Thames, The Ardens of, 211

Henley Street House, 41, 47, 50, 51, 54, 57, 58, 59, 60, 79, 112

Henneage, Sir Thomas, Vice-Chamberlain of the Household, 3, 66, 214, 222

Henrietta Maria, Queen, 101, 129

"Henry IV.," 68

"Henry VIII.," 77

Heraud, 164

Hertfordshire, 136, 137

Hewes, Joan, 173

Hewlands, 88

Hewyns, John, 49
  Margaret, 49
  Thomas, 49

Heylin's "History of St. George," 163

Higgins, Alice, 124

Highworth, Wilts, 208

Hill, Agnes (Mrs. Arden), 36, 49
  Elizabeth, 59
  Francis, 143
  John, of Bearley, 36
  John, of Rowington (1485), 8, 14
  Mary, 39
  William, 31

Hoare, John, 236

Hobbyns, Julian (Mrs. Shakespeare), 119

Hodgson, Margaret, 154
  Joseph, 154

Holder, Alice, 238

Holgrave, Alice, 206
  Elizabeth, 206
  John, 206
  Sir John, 205, 207
  Thomas, 205, 206, 207

Holinshed's "Chronicles," 17

Holland, Thurston, 233

Holyoake, Mr., "who made the dictionary," 100

Hooper, Humphrey, 42

Hornby, Richard, 54, 76

Hornchurch, Shakespeares of, 139, 140

Horndon, 215

Hospicium Vocatum le Greyhounde, 9

Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, 9

Hospital of St. Nicolas, Carlisle, 5

Howard, Lord Henry, 22

Howitt's, William, "Visits to Remarkable Places," 226

Huddespit, Elizabeth, 7
  Robert, 7

Hugh de Vienna, 167

Hulme, Agnes, 201

Hunter, Rev. Joseph, 13, 14, 33, 142, 145

Huva, or Uve, 164, 165

Hybarnes, 178

Hyde, Cecily de, 201


Ingleby, Dr. Thomas, 78, 85, 116

Ingon, 52, 112, 115, 123

Ingram, Richard, 31

Inson, William, 219


Jackley, 210

Jaggard, William, 229

James I., King, 73, 74

Jenkes, Dorothy, 114
  John, 31
  Thomas, 38, 222

Jennings, Alice, 228

Jeny, M.L., 159

Jephson, William, vintner, 152

Jerome, Thomas, 236

John, King, 68

John, St., of Jerusalem Hospital, 9

Jons, Joan, 139

Jonson, Ben, 75, 85, 99

Josselyn, Gabriel, 219


Kakley, Isolda, 7
  Robert, 7

Kambur, Margaret, 173

Kemp, William, 3

Kenilworth, 124, 127

Kent, Edward, 106
  Junior, 106

Kineton, 101

King, Mr. W. Wickham, 181

Kingsmell, John, Sergeant-at-Law, 28, 184

Kirkland, 5

Kirtlington, 209, 210

Knightley, Sir Richard, 28, 184

Knights Templars, 167

Knolles, Nicholas, Vicar of Alveston, 42, 45

Knowle, 124, 126, 131
  Guild of St. Anne of, 7, 10, 11, 12, 27, 28, 170, 188, 189

Kyngeston, Avisia de, 189

Kyngeston, Robert de, 189


Lacock Abbey, 154

Ladbroke, John, 177
  Joyce, 177

Lambert, Edmund, 36, 40, 41, 45, 46, 48, 49, 57
  Joan, 36, 39, 40, 49
  John, 36, 39, 40, 45, 47, 48, 49

Lane, Annes, 8
  Mrs., 96
  Nicholas, 57, 114
  Richard, 105

Lane, Green and Shakespeare complain of the tithes, 76

Lane slanders Susanna Hall, 77

Lanfranc's "Chirurgerie," 93

Langham, Alice, 9

Lansdale, Grace, 237

Lapworth, 127, 169, 189

Latton, Essex, 203, 206

Lawrence, Henry, scrivener, 77

Lee, Elizabeth, 236

Lee, John de, 207

Legh, de, Constantia, 4
  John de, 200, 201
  Matilda, 200, 201

Leicester, 133, 178, 180
  Earl of, 178, 179, 210, 211
  Mayor of, 133

Leicestershire, 31, 133, 134, 216
  Ardens, 216
  Shakespeares, 133

Leigh, John de, 201
  Maud, 199, 200
  Robert, 199, 200

Leighton, Sir Thomas, 160

Leland's "Itinerary," 27, 163, 171

Lench, John, 35

Leofric, Earl of Mercia, 165

Leonetta, 164

Letherbarrow, Elizabeth, 131

Leverunia, 165, 191

Ley, Francis, 15, 119
  Joan, 15, 119, 137

Lichfield Wills, 125, 174, 186

Lightfoot, Mr. J. W., 141

Lily, John, 212

Lingard, Rev. Edmund, 179

L'Isle, Richard de, 191

Little, Agnes, Prioress of Wroxall, 11, 12

Littleton, Thomas, 170

Litton, Master, 206

Lloyd, Rev. John William, 158

Lone, Alice, 8-12

Long, Theodosia, 219, 236

Longcroft, 31, 176, 183, 185, 221, 232

Long Itchington, 173, 188

Longsword, 2

"Love's Labour's Lost," 68

"Love's Labour's Wonne," 68

Lovetot, John, 215

Lewis, Lieutenant Ninian, 155

Lowston End, Rowington, 13

Lucy, Sir Thomas, 45, 54, 58, 64, 180
  Deer-stealing story fabulous, 180
  Lady, 90, 122

Lutterworth, 132

Lyannce, Hatton, 14


"Macbeth," 73

"Macbeth," The Scottish and English, 73

Macray, Rev. Dr., 130, 135

Madoc, Griffin ap, 198
  Margaret, daughter of, 198

Madywattons, 128

Malaleone, Eustachia, 167
  Savaricius, 167

Malone's "Life of Shakespeare," 23, 115

Malory, Charles, 119

Manning and Bray's "Surrey," 159

Mara, Agnes de la, 192

Marbury, Frances, 201
  Thomas, 201

Marchington Register, 186

Margaret's, St., Westminster, 237

Margery, Mrs., 121

Marlow, Francis, 236

Marsh, Antony, 80
  Mr. John, 80

Martin's, St., -in-the-Fields, 145, 146, 147, 236

Mary, Queen, 139

Massey, Hugh, 177

Masson, Robert, 186

Mather, Agnes, 218

Matthews, Maria, 129
  William, 129

Mauley's, Lord, Arms, 23

Maxton, Charlotte, 155

Maydes, Richard, 50

Mayne, James Edward, 157

Mayowe, "The Appeal," 56, 114
  Elizabeth, 223
  Henry, 223
  John, 45, 174, 223
  Thomas, 45, 56

Mazzini, 61

Megre, le, Oliva, 190
  Robert, 190
  William, 191

Melbourne, John, 220

Mellent, Earl of, 166

Mercia, 163

"Merchant of Venice," 68

Mere's, Professor of Literature at Oxford, "Wit's Treasury," 67, 68

Meriden, 8, 124, 130

Merrick, Madame Anne, 85

"Merry Wives of Windsor," 79

Merton College, Oxford, 15

"Microcosmus," John Davies', 34

Middleton, John, 234
  Sir John, 234

"Midsummer Night's Dream," 68

Milburn, Ellen, 150
  John, 150, 220

Milton's epitaph on Shakespeare, 85

Minworth, 178

Mixbury, 16

Moeles, The, 231

Montfort, Simon de, 167

More, Agnes, 234
  Sir Thomas, 234
  John, 212

Morris, Katherine, 119, 212

Morrison, Lady Elizabeth, 235

Mortimer, Isabella, 168
  Sir Roger, 168

Mortlake, 75

Moseley's, Mr., account, 85

Mountford, William, 91

Mowsley End, Rowington, 128

Muerson, Louisa, 156

Mug, Rev. Mr., 212

Muklowe, Katharine, 173, 231, 234
  Richard, 173

Murray, Edith, 156
  William Sim, 156

Myttons, Mr., 69


Nanson, Mr., Town Clerk of Carlisle, 221

Nash, Arms of, 101
  Edward, 102, 103, 106, 107
  Elizabeth, 96, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 109, 226
  Thomas, 89, 91, 95, 96, 97, 100, 101, 102, 109

Nash's "Worcestershire," 14

Naso, Richard, 127

Nason, John, 100

Natford, 171, 172

Neville, Barbara, 177
  Richard, 177
  Sir Edward, 174

Newburgh, Henry de, 166
  Margaret de, 166
  William de, 166

Newburghs, or Novoborgos, The, 166, 167, 168
  their arms, 168

Newcome, Colonel, 155

Newcourt's "Repertorium," 15, 204

New Place, 60, 67, 71, 72, 76, 77, 80, 89, 95, 101, 102, 103, 107, 108,
    117

Newport, Margaret, 204

Newton, Anna Catharine, 187, 232
  John, 187, 232

Nicholas, St., Hospital of, Carlisle, 5
  Parish, Warwick, 120, 225

Nichols, Sir George, "History of the English Poor Law," 37

Nichols's "Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica," 25, 30, 31, 93,
    130, 137, 197, 198
  "Herald and Genealogist," 125, 192
  "History of Leicestershire," 216
  "Progresses of King James," 74

Nicolas, Sir N.H., 21, 175, 198

Nicols, Thomas, 223

"Non Sans Droict," 22

Norhull, 167, 169

Norris, Rev. Henry, 6

Northampton, 194, 195

Northamptonshire, 195

Norton Curlew, 129

"Nottingham Records," edited by Mr. W. Stevenson, 5, 8, 10

Nuneaton, 166


Offord, 189

Oken's, Thomas, money, 119

Oldich, or Woldiche, 6, 7

Oliver, Mary, 154
  Laver, 158
  Thomas, 237

Ormerod's "Cheshire," 93, 196, 201
  "Miscellanea Palatina," 197, 199

Orreby, Agnes de, 197
  Sir John de, 198

Ortelius, 52

Oxfordshire, 134, 209, 211


Packwood, 127

Page, Elizabeth, 237

Pakeson, Thomas, 169

Pakingtons, The, of Worcester, 182
  their arms, 182

Palmer, Adam, 8, 37, 38, 40, 45, 50, 223
  Catherine, 202
  Elizabeth, 207
  John, 36
  Robert, 202

Pardu, John, 115

Park Hall, 178

Parkes, Alice, 135
  Penelope, 127
  Richard, 127

Parkins, Isabel, 124

Parnassus, Return from, 33

Parsons, Robert, 136

Pate, Rev. Lawrence, 210

Pearce, John, 237

Peche, John, 191
  Richard, 190

Pedimore, or Pedmore, Warwickshire, 169, 177, 181, 232
  Worcestershire, 40, 181, 232

Peele, George, 143
  Isabel, 143
  James, 143

Pegge, Mr., 163

Pembroke, Earl of, 70, 71, 74

Pennefather, Richard, 237

Penrith, 5

Pepper, Sarah, 202

Perche, Countess of, 165, 191

Percival, Right Hon. Margaret, 237

Perkes, John, 44
  Mary, 44, 49
  William, 44

Perkyns, John, 133
  Richard, 133
  William, 133

Perpoint, Thomas, 214

Peto, Humphrey, 45

Petyfere, Richard, 40

Philip, King, 139

Phillips, Anne, 237
  Augustine, 72, 73, 75
  Hugh, 218, 236
  Sir Thomas, 209

Phillis, or Felicia, of Warwick, 162

Pickering, John, Lord Keeper, 129

Pilkington, Margaret, 200

Pinley, 129

Pipe Office accounts, 3, 66

Pitt, William, 223

Plague in Stratford, 52

Planche's Roll of Arms, 213

Plautus, 68

Players, Earl of Worcester's, 54
  King's Company, 73, 74, 75
  the Lord Chamberlain's, 66
  the Queen's Company, 54

Plays not to be performed in Guildhall, Stratford, 82, 225

Plesseto, Alured de, 233

Plumer, Elizabeth, 236

Plumstead, Thomas of, 217

Plutarch's "Lives," 65

Poate, George, 137

Pole, William de la, Earl of Suffolk, 203

Pollard, Benfield, and Swanston _v._ Burbage, 70, 71, 81

Poole, Isabel, 126

Pooley, Elizabeth, 181
  Sir William, 181

Porter, Hugh, 37, 38, 50, 223
  John, 30
  Robert, 30

Portingale, Richard, 6

Pouter, Nicholas, 210

Powlett, William, D.D., 156

Pre-Shakespearean London Shakespeares, 139

Price, Goditha, 181
  Herbert, 181
  Michael, 57

Prince, John, of Abingdon, 135

Prins, William, 8

Prior, Walter, 210

"Pruslbury," 4

Pugh, Harriet, 237

Puttenham's "Art of Poetrie," 65

Pythagoras, 68

Pytt, William, 38


Quiney, Adrian, 50, 51, 54, 59, 92
  Elizabeth, 91
  Judith, poet's daughter, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 89, 91, 92, 100, 105, 109
  Richard, of London, 89, 92
  Richard, of Stratford, 68, 89, 91
  Richard, son of Thomas and Judith, and grandson of the poet, 92, 100
  Sarah, 92
  Shakespere, son of Thomas and Judith, and grandson of the poet, 92, 100
  Thomas, poet's son-in-law, 78, 79, 89, 91, 105, 109
  Thomas, son of Thomas and Judith, and grandson of the poet, 92, 100
  William, 92


Radcliffe, Elizabeth, 201
  John de, 200
  Matilda de, 200
  Richard de, 200

Rainsford, Lady Anne, 225
  Sir Henry, 225

Randall, John, 88

"Rape of Lucrece," 65, 66, 222

Ratcliffe, Mrs. Anne, 237
  Robert, 235

"Ratsey's Ghost," 34

Rawreth, 140

Raynborn, 164

Reve, John, 15
  William, 15

Rewardine, Gloucestershire, 87

Reynolds, Humphrey, 50
  Roger, 27, 29, 30, 194
  William, 80

"Richard II.," 68, 72

"Richard III.," 68

Richardson, Cicely, 138
  John, 63
  Sarah, 150

Ridley, Jane, 154
  Sir Matthew, 154

Rightwood, Hamond, 236

Robbins, Antony, 127

Roberts, Margery, 118
  Thomas, shoemaker, 118, 119

Robinson, Dr. William, 205
  John, 80

Rocliff, Master John, 204

Rodburn, 166

Rogers, Henry, 59
  Philip, 121

"Romeo and Juliet," 68, 108

Roses, The Wars of the, 26, 170

Rosswell, Mr., 69

Rotley, 166

Rous, John, 162

Rowbotham, Jane, 188

Rowington, 4, 8, 13, 14, 21, 54, 93, 113, 114, 115, 124, 127, 128, 129
  Court Rolls, 4, 8, 13
  Records of, edited by Mr. J.W. Rylands, 4, 14, 54, 80, 121,
      122, 129, 130, 220, 226, 227

Rucking, Kent, 141

Rupert, Prince, 101

Rushby, Agnes, 36
  Richard, 30, 36, 223
  Thomas, 80

Ruswell, Mary, 123

Rymer's "Foedera," the grant of Shakespeare and others, 73, 74


Sadler, Hamnet, 80
  Judith, 80
  Roger, baker, 41

Sage, Joseph, 158

Sakesper, Simon, 4

Sakspere, Henry, 114
  Margaret, 114

Salisbury, Earl of, 146

Saltley, 176, 177, 183

Salveyn, Geoffrey, 198

Sandells, Fulke, 63

Sanders, Margaret, 114
  Richard, 114

Sattlewell, William, 127

Saunders, Hugh, alias Shakespeare, 15, 16, 134

Sautemaris, Geoffrey de, 197

Savage, Mr. Richard, 120, 225

Saviour's, St., Church of, 83, 110

Saxper, Nicholas, 140
  Saray, 143

Sayer, Louisa Caroline, 156
  Robert, 156

Scarlett, or Skerlett, Elizabeth, 36, 223
  John, 31, 38
  Margaret, 31

Scatcliffe, John, 143

Schakespeir, or Schaftspeire, Sir Thomas, priest, 15, 139

Scory, Bishop, 211

Scotland, Shakespeare in, 73

Scott, Sir Walter, 71

Seeley, Martha, 152

Seneca, 68

Sewell, Margaret, 207

Shackspeare v. Lambert, 48, 57, 59

Shakespeare, Abigail, 143
  Adam, of Oldiche (1389), 6, 7
    the Younger (1441), 6
  Adrian, 130, 151
  Agnes, 8, 12, 15, 125, 156
  Alderman, the, 137, 153, 154, 158
  Alice, 7, 10, 12, 15, 40, 119, 123, 124, 125, 126, 140, 228
  Alicia, 7
  Alexander, 156, 159
  Allan, of Cumberland, 5
  Andrew, 125
  Ann, 124, 136, 138
  Annah, 124, 139, 158
  Anne, 125, 131, 136, 139, 158, 227, 228
  Anne, Mrs., 159
  Anne, the poet's sister, 49, 54, 56, 109
  Anne, the poet's wife, 80, 81, 88, 89, 90, 225
  Annis, 128
  Anthony, 115, 147, 148
  Antonio, 115, 119
  Antony, 12, 115
  arms of, 17-34, 59, 153
  Arthur, 137, 153, 154, 156
  Arthur Bucknall, 156
  Arthur Franklin, 157
  Arthur Robert, 155
  Arthur William, 154
  Arthur Wyndham, Rev., 157
  Augusta, 155, 156
  Barbara, 125
  Bennet, 153
  Benjamin, 121, 151, 152
  Betty, 132
  Catharine, 124, 125, 127, 136, 148
  Charles Bowles, 134
  Charles Maxtor, 155
  Charlotte, 155, 157
  Christian, 7, 124, 151
  Christopher, 11, 125, 127, 227
  Clement, 227
  Colin, 154, 157
  Cornelius, 124
  David, 157
  Dorothy, 127, 145, 146, 147
  Edmund, the poet's brother, 49, 56, 60, 109
  Edward, 120, 126, 127, 132, 140, 150, 159, 229, 230
  Edward O., 159
  Eleanor, 128, 136
  Elena, 12
  Elizabeth (Huddespit), 7
  Elizabeth, 7, 8, 121, 122, 124, 125, 126, 128, 134, 135, 136,
      139, 143, 151, 153, 154, 227, 228, 230

  Ellen, 134, 148, 150
  Ellinor, 135, 226
  Emily, 155, 159
  Emma, 156
  Florence, 129
  Frances, 124
  Francis, 144
  Frederick George, 155
  Geoffrey, of Brixton, 4
  George, 10, 111, 123, 125, 128, 129, 132, 138, 151, 152, 159, 226, 227
  George Bucknall, 156
  George Trant, 154
  Georgiana, 157
    Henrietta Matilda, 157
  Gilbert, the poet's brother, 49, 53, 72, 100, 111, 226
  Hamnet, the poet's son, 56, 67, 71, 90, 109
  Hannah, 130, 136, 158
  Harriet, 156, 157
  Harriet Blanche, 157
  Henrietta, 156
  Henry (1349), of Cumberland, 5
  Henry, 115, 119, 120, 126, 130, 137, 143, 155, 158, 159, 229
  Henry, the poet's uncle, 45, 50, 56, 57, 109, 114, 158, 224
  Henry Davenport, 154, 155, 156
  Henry John Childe, 156
  Hester, 124
  Humphrey, 118, 127, 132, 144, 227
  Hugh, 144
  Hugh, alias Saunders, 15, 16
  Ida Nea, 157
  Isabel, 123, 125, 143
  Isabella, Prioress of Wroxall, 7, 10, 11, 12
  Isolda (Kakley), 7
  James, 115, 132
  Jane, 144, 147, 148, 154, 227
  Jane, or Johanna, Domina, 11, 12, 14, 125
  Jeames, 115
  Joan, 8, 14, 114, 116, 128, 131
  Joan, the poet's sister, 49, 51, 52, 54, 79, 109
  Joane, 115, 119, 121, 128, 131
  Joanna, 7
  Johanna, 7, 13, 144
  Johanna, or Jane, 12, 116, 144
  Johannes (1526), 12
  John, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 114, 115, 118, 119, 120, 121, 123,
      124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 134, 135, 136,
      137, 138, 139, 140, 143, 150, 152, 153, 157, 159, 227, 228,
      229
  John, of Clifford Chambers, 119
    of Doncaster, 8
    of Ingon, 52, 115, 120, 226
    of Kent (1278), 5
    of Nottingham (1357), 5
    of Oldiche (1414), 7
    of Rowington, 114, 115
    of St. Clement's Danes, 146, 147, 148, 149
    of St. Martin's, 145, 146
    of Snitterfield, Agricola, 52, 116, 120, 145, 147, 152, 223
    of Warwick, 15, 130, 229
  John, the shoemaker, 58, 112, 118, 119, 120, 147
  John, the poet's father, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25,
      31, 33, 36, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52,
      53, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 62, 64, 94, 109, 110, 116, 158,
      175, 223, 224
    comes to Stratford-on-Avon, 50
    marries, 51
    alderman, 53
    bailiff, 53, 54
    place of residence, 55
    Lambert's mortgage, 45, 57
    death, 59
  John Davenport, 156
  John Dowdeswell, 154, 155
  John Jos. Art., 230
  John Joseph, 230
  John, of Shadwell, 152, 153, 154, 155, 157, 158
  John, of St. Clement's, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 230
  John, of St. Martin's, 145, 146, 147
  John Talbot, 154, 155, 156
  Jonathan, 152, 153
  Jone, 15, 131, 138, 139, 227
  Joseph, 139
  Joshua, 158
  Josiah, 228
  Joyce, 129, 137, 151
  Judith, 124, 139, 141, 151
  Judith, the poet's daughter, 56, 78, 81, 82, 90, 109
  Julian, 119
  Lawrence, 13, 14, 126
  Leonard, 135, 136, 141
  Leslie, 156
  Lettyce, 115
  Lionel Fairfax, 157
  Louisa, 156
  Lucy, 137
  Luke, 137
  Manasses, 151
  Margaret, 14, 15, 124, 129, 141, 148, 149, 150, 151, 227, 228
  Margaret, the poet's sister, 49, 52
  Margaret, wife of Henry, 114
  Margeria (1464), 7
  Margery (1458), 9
  Margery, Mrs., 121
  Maria, 129, 145, 146
  Marianne, 155
  Marie, 125, 127, 129
  Martha, 158
  Mary, 125, 128, 129, 131, 134, 136, 143, 149, 150, 152, 154,
      156, 157, 158, 227, 228, 229
  Mary, the poet's mother, 19, 22, 24, 25, 36, 37, 42, 43, 44,
      45, 48, 49, 58, 60, 76, 109, 110, 161, 184
    heir and executor to her father Robert, 38
    probable date of marriage, 51
    she died, but no memorial left, 60, 76
  Matthew, 138, 143, 144, 159
  Matthew, John, 154
    Mrs., 137
    Mrs. O., 159
  Nathaniel, 143
  Nicholas, 124, 125, 126, 128
  Owen, 157
  Peter (1483), 9, 142
  Peter (1596), 10
  Peter, 14, 124, 125, 130
  Philip, 118, 125
  Radulphus, 7
  Ralph, 7, 13, 136
  Reginald, 141
  Rebecca, 228
  Rebekah, 151
  Richard (1457), 7
  Richard, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 123, 125
  Richard, of Rowington, 14, 15, 114, 121, 226, 227, 228
  Richard, of Snitterfield, probably poet's grandfather, 7, 8,
      12, 14, 15, 21, 36, 37, 50, 52, 109, 113, 114, 116, 158, 223
  Richard, the bailiff, 12, 13, 14, 113
  Richard, the poet's brother, 49, 54, 109, 110, 111
  Richmond, 155
  Richmond Campbell, Sir, 154, 155
  Robert, 8, 13, 15, 115, 123, 124, 126, 134, 135, 136, 138,
      140, 144, 156, 157, 158
  Robert, of Pontefract (1381), 6
  Robina, 136
  Roger, 21, 114, 123, 124, 125
  Roger, the monk, 14, 21, 124
  Roger, the Yeoman of the King's Chamber, 21
  Samuel, 137, 139, 140, 152, 154
  Sara, 125, 143
  Sarah, 158
  Selina, 155
  Simon, of Gloucestershire (1260), 4
  Sophia, 159
  Susan, 139, 147, 148
  Susanna, the poet's daughter, 56, 75, 77, 79, 90, 95, 109
    her epitaph, 104
  Susannah, 122, 124, 125, 136, 139
  Thomas (1359), of Coventry, 5
  Thomas (1375), of Youghal, 6, 141
  Thomas (1476), 7
  Thomas (1486), 7
  Thomas (1511), 11
  Thomas, 13, 14, 15, 19, 21, 114, 119, 120, 121, 124, 125,
      126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 133, 134, 135, 137, 139, 140,
      141, 144, 148, 151, 152, 226, 227, 228, 229
  Thomas, of Ireland, 6, 8, 141
  Thomas, of Lutterworth, 132, 133, 134
  Thomas, of Oxford, 134
  Thomas, of Snitterfield, 109, 115, 116, 145, 147, 158
  Thomas, of Staple Inn, 132, 133, 152
  Thomas, Royal Messenger, 21, 144
  Thomas, Sir, the Priest, 15, 138
  Ursula, 118
  Walter, 124
  Walter (1379), 6
  Widow, 120, 136, 226, 228
  William, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19, 21, 114, 115, 119, 120, 121, 122,
      123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 131, 134, 136, 138, 142, 143,
      151, 152, 155, 156, 158, 228, 229, 230
  William (1398), of Cumberland, 5
  William (1413), of London, 9
  William Makepeace, 154
  William Oliver, 154, 155
  William, the money-lender and malt agent, 120, 121
  William, the poet, 15, 18, 19, 22, 33, 34, 49, 57, 59, 64, 69, 73, 76,
      79, 80, 83, 84, 85, 87, 88, 89, 90, 95, 97, 100, 104, 108, 111, 112,
      120, 121, 147, 148, 160, 180, 186, 217, 222, 227
    he used the coat of arms, 33
    consented to sale of Asbies, 46
    marriage, 56
    birth of children, 56
    became head of family, 61
    his betrothal, 62
    marriage license, 63
    friends in London, 64
    sonnets and poems to same patron, 66
    played before the Queen, 66
    death of his only son, 67
    Quiney's letter to Shakespeare, 69
    Shakespeare in Scotland, 73
    death of his mother, 76
    his will, 78, 79
    his epitaph, 84
    William, his poems, 86
   William Powlett, 156
   William Ross, 156
   William of Westminster, 142
   Winifred, 127
   Wyndham, Rev. Arthur, 157

Shakespeare, the arms of, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 33, 59, 112, 153,
    156, 222
  Impalement of Ardens with, 24, 33, 175, 222

Shakespeare's ancestry, 6

Shakespeare's descendants, 87, 104, 108

"Shakespeareana Genealogica." See G.R. French.

Shakespeare Inn, Gloucester, 109

"Shakespeare Jahrbuch," Berlin, 3

Shakespeare Library in Warwick Castle, 117, 120

Shakespeare's Name, The Earliest Official Record of, 3, 66

Shakespeare signatures, 3

Shakespeares, the, of Alcester, 10, 124
  Ascote, 10
  Baddesley Clinton, 124
  Balsall, 7, 10, 124
  Beausal, 10
  Bedfordshire, 136
  Berkshire, 132
  Berkswell, 10, 124
  Budbrook, 10, 124
  Cumberland, 5
  Derbyshire, 136
  Dursley, 132
  Essex, 4, 10, 138
  Fillongley, 111, 131
  Gloucestershire, 4, 132
  Grafton, 10
  Hampshire, 136
  Haseley, 10, 124
  Hatton, 10, 122, 124
  Hertford, 136
  Kenilworth, 124
  Kingswood, 130
  Knowle, 10, 124, 126, 131
  Lapworth, 10, 124
  Leicestershire, 132, 133, 134
  London, 137, 142
  Meriden, 11, 124
  Northampton, 132
  Norton Lindsey, 10
  Nottingham, 5, 8
  Oxford, 132, 134, 135
  Packwood, 10, 11, 124
  Rowington, 8, 10, 12, 19, 124, 129
  Snitterfield, 10, 28, 36
  South Stoke, 136
  Staffordshire, 10, 132
  Surrey, 4, 136
  Tachbrook, 10
  Warwick, 10, 14, 130, 131, 132
  Worcestershire, 10, 132
  Wroxall, 10, 124

Shakespeares, The, 31, 39, 40, 123, 223

"Shakespeare's Warwickshire Contemporaries," 64, 65

Shakespeare, The name of, 1, 2, 3

Shakespeare _v._ Lambert, 47, 48, 57, 59

Shakespeye, Simon, 4

Shakesphere, 140

Shakespurr, 140

Shakspere, William (1413), 9

Shallett, Elizabeth, 153

Shallow, Justice, 64, 79

Shankes' Petition, 71

Shaw's "Staffordshire," 184, 185, 187, 198, 199, 232

Shaxsby, John, 140

Shawe, Ralphe, 58

Sheldon, Mrs., 100

Shenton, Geoff. de, 186
  Nichola, 186

Sheppard's, Samuel, "Epigrams," 85

Shillingworth, Mr. Ralph, 134

Shirley, Henry, 176

Shottery, 87, 88, 226

Shotteswell, Catharine, 127
  William, 126

Shrawley, 128, 129

Shugborough, Simon, 179

Shuter, Richard, 122

Siche, Thomas, of Arscote, 50

Sidney, Sir Robert, 22

Sigisbert, 1

Siward, 166

Skinner, William, 128

Skreene, Alice, 206
  Elizabeth, 203
  John, 204

Slender, 79

Sly, John, 227
  William, 73

Smith, Mrs. Alice, 236
  Henry, 105, 106
  Mrs. Margaret, 219
  Sir Thomas, 18
  William, 57, 105, 109, 119, 124, 145
  William Shakespeare, 226

Snitterfield, 27, 30, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 44, 45, 47, 50,
    113, 114, 123, 174, 223, 224

Solar, William, 4

Somerville, John, 30, 178, 179, 180
  Margaret, 178, 179
  Elizabeth, 179
  Walter de, 230

Sonnets, The date of, 66

Southampton, Mary, Countess of, 2, 221
  Henry, Earl of, 58, 65, 66, 67, 71, 72, 74, 147, 222

Spateman, Anne, 187, 232
  Rev. John, 187, 232
  Thomas, 238

Spencer, Thomas, 123

Spenser, Edmund, 2

Spondon, Robert le, 5

Stafford, Sir Richard, 199
  Katharine, 199

Stanhope, Mrs. Henrietta Maria, 181
  John de, 200
  Sir William, 201, 222
  Thomas de, 200

Starke, Grace, 138

Stanley, Catherine, of Hooten, 201, 222

Statfold, 199

Stevenson's "Nottingham," 5, 8, 10

Stiffe, Barbara, 124

Stillard, Bridget, 218
  Robert, 218

Stokeport, Joane, 198
  Sir Richard, 198

Stokes, Ralph, 124

Storeton, Grace, 139

Stotesby, Agnes, 209

Stratford-on-Avon, 19, 41, 50, 51, 52, 58, 59, 79, 92, 101, 116
  its records, 19, 37, 41, 50, 51, 53, 56, 57, 69, 95, 116,
    119, 121
  its church, 60, 84
  its Grammar School, 61
  the master of, 61

Stratton, Thomas, 208

Stringer, Agnes, 40, 41, 49, 62
  Arden, 49
  Ellice, 49
  John, 49
  Thomas, 40, 41, 49, 50, 63

Sturley, Abraham, 68
  Katharine, 100

Suffolk Visitation, 234

Sulgrave, 170

Surrey Visitation, 234

Sutton, 169
  Anne, or Dudley, 64
  Sir Edward, Lord Dudley, 64

Swaldyve, 169, 233

Swanston, Benfield and Pollard _v._ Burbage, 70

Swillington, Richard, 209

Swynford, Sir John, 168
  Roger, 230


Tachbrook, 123

Talbot, Sir Edmund, 234
  Martha, 154

Talbots, The, 160, 234

Tardebigg, 14

Taylor, Alice, 12
  Will, 233

Tayloure, Rev. John, Vicar of St. Brigyde, 177

Teery, Balsall, 10
  William, 133

Temple, Grafton, 10

Tetherton, William, 121

Thackeray, Emily, 154
  William Makepeace, 154, 155

Thickness, Edward, 145

Thomas, Dr. W., 11

Thompson, Marian Sophia, 155
  Thomas, 123

Thornbury, Dr., Bishop of Worcester, 100

Thorne, Nicholas, 210
  Robert, 210
  Thomas, 209

Thrale, George, 172

Throckmorton, Clement, 35
  Francis, 64
  George, Sir, 28, 178
  Job, 122
  John, Sir, 64
  Mary, 178
  Mrs., 100
  Nicholas, Sir, 95
  Robert, Sir, 27, 28, 29, 178, 184

Thurley, 172

Timbs, John, "Curiosities of London," 143

Timporley, 201, 234

"Titus Andronicus," 68

Toupe, Jane, 230

Townsend, Henry, 115

Tracy, Sir Paul, 94

Traffords, The, 195

Trapp, Mr. John, 100

Trussell, Alured, of Billesley, 28
  Dorothy, 28
  Thomas, 27, 28, 29, 30, 57, 58, 174
  Warine, Sir, 27
  William, Sir, 27, 174

Tucker, Mr. Stephen, Somerset Herald, 20

Turchil, 160, 165, 166, 167, 190, 191

Turner, George, 51

Twycroft, The, Rowington, 13

Twycross, John, 127

Tybotes, John, 125

Tyler, Richard, 58


Underhill, Fulke, 67
  Hercules, 67
  William, 67

Underhills, The, 100

Upton, Cheshire, 200

Upton, Warwickshire, 231

Uva, or Huva, 164, 165


Vale, John, 123
  Katharine, 123
  Raufe, 173

"Valor Ecclesiasticus," 12, 113

Vassal, Asser, 139

Vautrollier, Thomas, printer of London, 65

Veley, Charles Augustus, Archdeacon of Essex, 138, 139

Venables, Hugh de, 198
  Alice, 198

"Venus and Adonis," 65, 66, 222

Verney, Sir Greville, 102

Vernon, Margaret, 129
  Ralph de, 168
  Rose, 168

Verstegan's "Restitution of Decayed Intelligence," 1


Wadley, Rev. J.P., 139

Waferer, Francis, 176, 177

Wagstaff, John, 30, 223

Waight, Mary, 151

Wake, Nicholas, 169
  Robert, 169
  Thomas, 169

Wale, Edward, 182

Wales, Prince of, as Earl of Chester, 200

Walker, Barbara, 107
  Sir Edward, 107
  Henry, 76
  William, 76, 80

Wall, William, 231

Walpole, H., 237
  Hon. Thomas, 237
  Lord, 237

Walton-on-Thames, 137, 138, 159

Wapenham, 170, 194

Ward, Simon, 194

Wardrobe, The tenement in, 80, 102

Warehorne, Kent, 141

Warenne, Sir Edward, 233

Warwick, 10, 14, 119, 122, 124, 130, 131, 164
  Castle, 117, 162, 166

Warwickshire, 19, 27, 31, 58, 87, 99, 118, 123, 131, 166, 173, 176, 178,
    231
  Countess of, 72
  Earls of, 31, 58, 72, 137, 162, 163, 166, 168, 169, 174
  Gentlemen of, 19, 93, 95, 130, 183

Washington, George, 195
  Laurence, 195
  Robert, 195

Wasteneys, Ellen, 199

Waterfield, Emma, 156

Watford, William of, 196, 197

Watford, 196, 197

Watts, Richard, 104

Waulkner, Mary, 236

Weale, John, 122

Webbe, Alexander, 36, 37, 39, 40, 41, 49
  Agnes (Mrs. Arden), 36, 49
  Margaret, 36, 37, 39, 49, 56
  Robert, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 49, 56, 114, 223
  Thomas, 42

Webberley, Edmund, 237

Wedgewood, Mary, 186
  William, 54

Weever family, 233

Wegeat, or Wigatus, 164

Welcombe, 78, 80

Welles, Thomas, 106

Wennington, 216

Wery, Gregory, 205

West, Edward, 51
  Sarah, 237

West's "Symboleography Concords," 42

Westmoreland, Earl of, 174, 177

Whalley's "Northampton," 168, 189, 196

Whateley, Anne, 63

Wheeler, John, 57, 58
  Mrs., 58
  Mr. R.B., 118, 226

Whitelock, James, 133

Whitmore, William, 88

Whitrefe, Joan, 115

Whittington, Thomas, 88

Whitefriars Theatre at the time of Shakespeare, 224

Wigatus, or Wegeat, 164

Wigod, or Wigotus, 165

William the Conqueror, 165
  the Lion, 192
  Rufus, 166

Williams, Agnes, 140

Willis, Edward, 54, 59

Wilmecote, 27, 36, 37, 38, 42, 49

Wilmer, Robert, 231
  William, 231

Wilmot, Leonard, 135

Wilson, Anne, 139
  Harry, 138
  Rev. Thomas, 96, 100

Wilson's, Robert, "Cobbler's Prophecy," 18

Wilton, 74, 75

Wilton, Samuel, 153

Wiltshire, James, Earl of, 170

Winch, William, 143

Winchester, 74

Windebanck, Sir Thomas, 145

Winworth, 167, 169

Wolferstan, Samuel Pipe, 184

"Women, History of," 85

Wood, William, 27, 29, 30, 173

Woodcock, William, 157

Woodham, Agnes, 12
  Richard, 12, 14, 126

Wood's "Athenae Oxonienses," 15

Woodward, Isabel, 209
  Mrs., 96

Wooten Wawen, 189

Worcester, 63, 93
  Bishop of, 100
  Earl of, 174
  his Court, 77, 79, 122

Worcester, his register, 63, 93
  MS., 122
  Wills, 13, 14, 37, 38, 52, 93, 128

Worcestershire, 40, 100, 181

Wren, Christopher, 145

Wright, Sir Christopher, 205
  Mrs. Elizabeth, 219, 236
  Rev. Walter, 210
  William, 146

Wrottesley, Sir Hugh, 199, 200
  Isabel, 199

Wroxall, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 21, 113, 115, 124, 137

Wyckeham, Robert de, 169, 233
  Elizabeth, 169

Wylemyn, Nicholas, of Shrewley, 230


Yate, or Yates, Anthony, 209
  Eleanor, 210
  Francis, 212
  John, 211, 234
  Simon, 207, 208
  Thomas, 208

Yates, Luke, 236

Yeatman's, Mr. "Gentle Shakespeare," 7, 12, 15, 113, 129

_Yorkshire Archaeological Journal_, 234
  Visitation, 234

Yoxall, 27, 31, 32, 172, 176, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187


Zouch, Lord, 160
  William de la, 194

Zupitza, 162



[Illustration]

_Elliot Stock, Paternoster Row, London_






End of Project Gutenberg's Shakespeare's Family, by Mrs. C. C. Stopes