Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Matthew Wheaton
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net









    A BRIEF HANDBOOK OF ENGLISH AUTHORS


    BY OSCAR FAY ADAMS

    BOSTON
    HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY
    New York: 11 East Seventeenth Street
    The Riverside Press, Cambridge
    1884

    Copyright, 1883,
    By OSCAR FAY ADAMS.

    _All rights reserved._

    _The Riverside Press, Cambridge_:
    Electrotyped and Printed by H. O. Houghton & Co.




PREFACE.


    This brief handbook is intended simply for every-day use, when
    reference to larger works of the kind may not be convenient.
    Experience has proved that the small book which can be readily
    taken up is consulted far more frequently than the ponderous
    volume that requires great muscular exertion to lift.

    In the world of letters as in the world of society
    conventionality plays no unimportant part, as every student of
    literature knows. That there is such a thing as "conventional
    immortality" every biographical dictionary yields abundant
    evidence. Even so small a work as this must necessarily contain
    many names that have achieved this conventional immortality
    through the accident of circumstance. Some literary fames are
    among the legacies left by preceding centuries to the present
    one to account for and explain. And when all is said, "the
    iniquity of oblivion blindly scattereth her poppy and dealeth
    with the memory of men without distinction to merit of
    perpetuity."
                                                    OSCAR FAY ADAMS.
    ERIE, PA., _October 28, 1883_.




PUBLISHERS REFERRED TO IN THIS VOLUME.


    _Apl._      Appleton, D., & Co.                      New York City.
    _Arm._      Armstrong, A. C., & Son                   "    "    "
    _A. T. S._  American Tract Society                    "    "    "
    _A. U. A._  American Unitarian Association            Boston, Mass.
    _Bi._       Bickers & Son                          London, England.
    _Ca._       Carter, Robert, & Brothers               New York City.
    _Cas._      Cassell, Petter, Galpin & Co                  New York,
                                                                London,
                                                             and Paris.
    _Cath._     Catholic Publication Soc. Co.            New York City.
    _Clx._      Claxton, E., & Co.                    Philadelphia, Pa.
    _Di._       Dick & Fitzgerald                        New York City.
    _Do._       Dodd, Mead & Co..                         "    "    "
    _Dra._      Draper, Warren F.                        Andover, Mass.
    _Dut._      Dutton, E. P., & Co.                     New York City.
    _El._       Ellis, George H.                          Boston, Mass.
    _Est._      Estes & Lauriat                             "       "
    _Fu._       Funk, I. K., & Co.                       New York City.
    _Har._      Harper & Bro.                             "    "    "
    _Ho._       Holt, Henry, & Co.                        "    "    "
    _Hou._      Houghton, Mifflin & Co.                   Boston, Mass.
    _Jo._       Johnson, T. & J. W.                   Philadelphia, Pa.
    _Ju._       Judd, Orange                             New York City.
    _La._       Lea's, Henry C., Son & Co.            Philadelphia, Pa.
    _Le._       Lee & Shepard                             Boston, Mass.
    _Lip._      Lippincott, J. B., & Co.              Philadelphia, Pa.
    _Lit._      Little, Brown & Co.                       Boston, Mass.
    _Lo._       Lothrop, D., & Co.                          "      "
    _Mac._      Macmillan & Co.                    New York and London.
    _Mil._      Miller, James                            New York City.
    _Mur._      Murphy, John                             Baltimore, Md.
    _Mu._       Munsell                                   Albany, N. Y.
    _Nel._      Nelson, Thos., & Sons                         New York,
                                                                London,
                                                         and Edinburgh.
    _Os._       Osgood, James R., & Co.                   Boston, Mass.
    _P. B._     Presbyterian Bd. of Publication       Philadelphia, Pa.
    _Pet._      Peterson, T. B., & Co.                Philadelphia, Pa.
    _Phi._      Phillips & Hunt                          New York City.
    _Pi._       Pict, John B.                            Baltimore, Md.
    _Por._      Porter & Coates                       Philadelphia, Pa.
    _Put._      Putnam's, G. P., Sons                    New York City.
    _Ran._      Randolph, A. D. F., & Co.                 "    "    "
    _Rob._      Roberts Brothers                          Boston, Mass.
    _Rou._      Routledge, George, & Sons          New York and London.
    _Sad._      Sadlier D. &. J., & Co.                  New York City.
    _Scr._      Scribner's, Charles, Sons                 "    "    "
    _Sh._       Sheldon & Co.                             "    "    "
    _Th._       Thomas, F. H.                            St. Louis, Mo.
    _Wid._      Widdleton, W. J.                         New York City.
    _Wiley_     Wiley, John, & Son                        "    "    "
    _Wor._      Worthington, R.                           "    "    "




HANDBOOK OF ENGLISH AUTHORS.


=Abbott, Edwin A.= 183 Shakespearean scholar. Author of a
Shakespearean Grammar, a Handbook of Elizabethan English, etc. _Pub.
Mac. Rob._

=A'Becket, Gilbert Abbot.= 1811-1856. Humorist. Author Comic Hist. of
England, Comic Hist. of Rome, Comic Blackstone, etc. _Pub. Apl. Lip._

=Adams, Mrs. Sarah [Flower].= 1805-1848. Known chiefly by her hymn,
"Nearer, my God, to Thee."

=Adams, Wm.= 1814-1848. Religious writer. Author of Sacred Allegories,
etc. _See Edition of 1869, with Life._ _Pub. Lip._

=Addison, Joseph.= 1672-1719. Essayist and poet. His tragedy of Cato
is now little read, but his Hymns still continue deservedly popular.
As a prose writer A. has exercised an influence upon the manners,
morals, and general culture of his time not easily overestimated. His
style is graceful, gentle, and persuasive. With Steele he created the
Periodical Essay, and was the chief contributor to the Tatler,
Spectator, and Guardian. _See Thackeray's Eng. Humorists_, _Aikin's
Memorials of Addison._ _Pub. Har. Lip._

=Aguilar [ae-ge-lar'], Grace.= 1816-1847. Novelist. Home Influence,
Woman's Friendship, and Days of Bruce are her chief works. _Pub. Apl.
Har._

=Aikin [[=a]'kin], John.= 1747-1822. Biographer and miscellaneous
writer. One of the authors of Evenings at Home. _Pub. Har._

=Aikin, Lucy.= 1781-1864. Dau. to J. A. Historian and poet. Author
Memoirs of the Courts of Elizabeth, James I., Charles I., Memorials of
Addison, etc.

=Ainsworth, Robert.= 1660-1743. Classical lexicographer.

=Ainsworth, Wm. Francis.= 180 Geologist and traveller. Author
Travels in Asia Minor, Researches in Assyria, Babylonia, and Chaldea,
etc.

=Ainsworth, Wm. Harrison.= 1805-1882. Cousin to W. F. A. Novelist. His
historical novels are numerous, but Jack Sheppard is his most famous
work, and has been 8 times dramatized. His popularity has been very
great, many of his works having been translated into most European
languages, yet their literary merit is not high, and the influence of
Jack Sheppard, in particular, is pernicious. _Pub. Har. Rou. Pet._

=Airy, George Biddell.= 180 Astronomer. Author Essays on the
Invasion of Britain by Julius Caesar, and numerous scientific papers of
value.

=Akenside, Mark.= 1721-1770. Poet and physician. Author of a
philosophical poem in blank verse on The Pleasures of the Imagination.
_Pub. Hou._

=Alcuin [[)a]l'-kwin].= c. 735-804. Abp. York. Writer of Latin
commentaries, dogmatic treatises, and numerous Latin poems.

=Aldhelm.= 656-709. Anglo-Latin poet. His principal theme is the
praise of virginity, on which he has written in both prose and verse.

=Alexander, Adam.= 1741-1809. Scotch grammarian. Author of Classical
Biog. etc.

=Alexander, Mrs. Cecil Frances.= 18-- ----. Poet. Best known by her
famous poem, The Burial of Moses. _Pub. Dut. Mac._

=Alexander, Mrs.= Novelist. See Hector, Mrs. Annie Alexander.

=Alexander, Wm.= c. 1580-1640. Scotch poet. Author Recreations with
the Muses, Doomsday, etc. Style didactic and heavy. _See Ward's Eng.
Poets, vol. 2._

=Alford [awl'ford], Henry.= 1810-1871. Dean of Canterbury. Author of
Poems, a valuable edition of the Greek Testament, a much criticised
Plea for the Queen's English, etc. _See Life, Journals, and Letters.
See Moon's The Dean's English._ _Pub. Har. Ran. Rou._

=Alfred the Great.= 848-901. The Father of English Prose. An untiring
scholar whose labors gave form and dignity to the English tongue. His
translations from the Latin are numerous and valuable, among them
being Baeda's Ecclesiastical History and Boethius's Consolations of
Philosophy. _See Green's Making of England._

=Alfric.= ---- 1006. Abp. Canterbury. A noted theologian and
grammarian. His 80 Homilies his chief work. He translated the books of
Moses and wrote many theological works.

=Alison, Archibald.= 1757-1839. Scotch theological writer. Essays on
Taste, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Alison, Sir Archibald.= 1792-1867. Son to preceding. Historian.
Author of a Hist. of Europe in 18 vols. and a Life of Marlborough.
_Pub. Har._

=Allein [[)a]l'l[)e]n], Joseph.= 1633-1668. Theologian. Author of
Alarm to the Unconverted.

=Allen, Chas. Grant.= 184 Author of Physiological AEsthetics,
Color and Sense, Force and Energy, etc. _Pub. Apl._

=Allingham, Wm.= 182 Irish poet. Author Day and Night Songs,
Songs, Ballads and Stories, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=A. L. O. E.= See Tucker, Charlotte.

=Andrews, Lancelot.= 1555-1626. Bp. Winchester. The most eminent
preacher of his time, and a High Church theologian of great rigor and
learning. He was one of the translators of the Bible and author of 4
vols. of Sermons and a Manual of Private Devotions. Style involved and
artificial. _Pub. Dut._

=Anster, John.= 1798-1867. Irish poet. Author of a much admired
translation of Faust.

=Anstey, Christopher.= 1724-1805. Poet. The New Bath Guide (pub. 1766)
is his chief work and was the most popular book of its day. It is a
lively, versified description of life and manners of Bath. _See his
Works, pub. 1808, with Life, by his son._

=Arbuthnot [aer'b[)u]th-not], John.= 1675-1735. Humorist. Author Hist.
John Bull, Art of Political Lying, Memoirs of P. P. Clark of this
Parish, and supposed author of the greater part of the famous satire
upon the abuses of learning, the Memoirs of Martinus Scriblerus.

=Armstrong, John.= 1709-1779. Scotch poet and physician. Author of the
Art of Preserving Health, a poem of much originality of style.

=Arnold, Edwin.= 183 Poet and journalist. His chief work, The
Light of Asia, gives him a high rank among modern poets. The subject
is the life of Buddha. He has translated much from the Sanskrit, and
is the author of Griselda, Lyrical and Dramatic Poems, The Indian Song
of Songs, Pearls of the Faith, etc. Style elevated and versification
musical. _Pub. Rob._

=Arnold, Matthew.= 182 Son to succeeding. Poet and essayist. His
poetry is pervaded by a vein of doubt and mistrust, although elevated
in character and of great merit. Tristram and Iseult, and Thyrsis, an
elegy on the poet Clough, are among his best poems. His prose works
are numerous and important. Literature and Dogma, and Essays in
Criticism are among the best known. The phrase "sweetness and light"
was made familiar by him. _See Hutton's Essays, Swinburne's Essays and
Studies, Stedman's Victorian Poets, Edinburgh Rev. April, 1869._ _Pub.
Har. Mac. Ho. Ste._

=Arnold, Thomas.= 1795-1842. Head Master of Rugby. Author Hist. Rome
and Lect. on Modern Hist. He exercised a great and beneficial
influence upon the minds of the young Englishmen of his time. _See
Life and Correspondence of Arnold, by A. P. Stanley, and Hughes'
School Days at Rugby._ _Pub. Apl._

=Arnold, Thos. Kerchever.= 1800-1853. Author of classical text-books.
_Pub. Apl._

=Arnold, Wm. Delafield.= 1828-1859. Son to T. A. Writer of historical
sketches and lectures.

=Arnott, Neil.= 1788-1874. Scotch scientist. Author Elements of
Physics, etc. _Pub. Apl._

=Ascham [[)a]s'kam], Roger.= 1515-1568. Tutor of Lady Jane Grey and Q.
Elizabeth. Author of Toxophilus, a treatise on the bow, and The
Schoolmaster. A. possessed a clear, correct style.

=Ashe, Thomas.= 183 Poet. Author of The Sorrows of Hypsipyle,
etc.

=Ashmole, Elias.= 1617-1692. Antiquary. Author of Laws of the Order of
the Garter, etc.

=Atterbury, Francis.= 1662-1732. Bp. Rochester. Theologian. Author
Sermons and numerous controversial writings.

=Aubrey, John.= 1626-1697. Antiquary. A. published a collection of
popular superstitions.

=Austen, Jane.= 1775-1817. Novelist. Author of Pride and Prejudice,
Sense and Sensibility, Northanger Abbey, Mansfield Park, Persuasion,
Emma, The Watsons, and Lady Susan. These novels are examples of the
finest literary art, and have delighted cultured minds for almost
three generations. Her character-drawing is strong and realistic. _See
Atlantic Monthly, Feb. 1863. See Jane Austen and her Works by Sarah
Tytler (pub. 1881)._ _Pub. Har. Por. Lit. Rou._

=Austin, Alfred.= 183 Poet and novelist. Author of An Artist's
Proof, Interludes, The Human Tragedy, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Austin, Mrs. Sarah.= 1793-1867. Author Characteristics of Goethe, and
of numerous translations from the German.

=Ayton [[=a]'tun], Sir Robert.= 1570-1638. Scotch poet. Remembered for
his lyric, "I do confess thou'rt smooth and fair."

=Aytoun [a'tun], Wm. Edmondstoune.= 1813-1865. Scotch poet. Author
Lays of the Scottish Cavaliers, Bothwell, Edinburgh after Flodden, and
with T. Martin, of the Bon Gaultier Ballads. _See Memoir by Theodore
Martin._ _Pub. Arm. Hou._




=Babbage, Chas.= 1790-1871. Mathematician and philosopher. Author of
The Economy of Manufactures and Machinery, A Ninth Bridgewater
Treatise, etc.

=Bacon, Francis.= Viscount St. Albans and Baron Verulam. 1561-1626.
Philosopher. The Founder of Inductive Philosophy. He wrote, in both
Eng. and Latin, The advancement of Learning, Novum Organum and
Historia Naturalis et Experimentalis from the Instauratio Magna,
which embodies his system of philosophy. His Essays are his most
important English work. A man of great genius and wonderful
intellectual activity whose writings cover a wide range. He awakened
the scientific spirit in England and gave it form. The best edition of
B. is that by James Spedding. _See Life and Letters of Bacon, by James
Spedding (1870), also W. H. Dixon's Personal History of Lord Bacon._
_Pub. Hou._

=Bacon, Roger= (Friar.) 1214-1292. Philosopher. The great light of the
thirteenth century. In his Opus Major he anticipated many inventions
of later times, and displayed a familiarity with all branches of study
of his day.

=Bage, Robert.= 1728-1801. Novelist. Author of Man as he Is, The Fair
Syrian, etc. _See Life, by Walter Scott._

=Bagehot [b[=a]j'ut], Walter.= 1826-1877. Essayist and journalist.
Author of Lombard Street, Physics and Politics, The Eng. Constitution,
and Essays on Silver. _See Living Age, April 19, 1879._ _Pub. Apl.
Lit. Scr._

=Bailey, Philip James.= 181 Poet. Author of Festus, The Angel
World, The Mystic, The Age, etc. Festus, which had a brief popularity,
is a work of unequal merit, but contains a few brilliant passages.

=Baillie, Joanna.= 1764-1851. Scotch dramatist. Has been called "the
female Shakespeare." Author of Plays on the Passions, etc. Her tragedy
of De Montfort is her finest effort. _See complete Works in one vol.
with Life (1853). See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4._

=Baker, Sir Samuel White.= 182 Traveller. Author of the Albert
Nyanza, The Nile Tributaries of Abyssinia, Ismailia, etc. _Pub. Har.
Lip. Mac._

=Balfour, Francis Maitland.= 1851-1882. Biologist. Author Elements of
Comparative Embryology. Development of the Elasmobranch Fishes, etc.
Style acute and original. _See Fortnightly Rev. Nov. 1882._ _Pub.
Mac._

=Banim [b[=a]'nim], John.= 1798-1842. Irish novelist. His novels deal
almost exclusively with the tragic side of Irish peasant life. _See
Life, by P. J. Murray, 1857._

=Banks, Sir Joseph.= 1743-1820. Naturalist. _See Cuvier, Elegy on Sir
J. Banks, 1821._

=Barbauld [bar'bawld or bar-b[=o]'], Mrs. Anna Laetitia.= 1743-1825.
Miscellaneous writer. Author of Hymns in Prose, Miscellaneous Poems,
etc. Among her best efforts is the exquisite little poem, Life. Some
of her religious poetry is deservedly popular. Style easy and
graceful. _See edition with Memoir, by L. Aikin, 1827._

=Barbour, John.= 1316-1396. Archdeacon of Aberdeen. Scotch poet. His
Bruce, a metrical hist. in 13,000 octosyllabic lines, is a chronicle
of the life of King Robert I., and has historical value as well as
literary merit. _See Craik's Eng. Lit. vol. I._

=Barclay, Robert.= 1648-1690. Scotch writer. His Apology for the
Quakers was first pub. in Latin.

=Barham [b[)a]r'am], Richard Harris.= 1788-1845. Humorous poet. Author
of the Ingoldsby Legends, a witty volume of facile rhymes. _Pub. Por.
Wid._

=Baring-Gould, Sabine.= 183 Author Curious Myths of the Middle
Ages, Lives of the Saints, etc. _See Lit. World, Jan. 13, 1883._ _Pub.
Apl. Lip. Rob._

=Barnard, Lady Anne.= 1750-1825. Scotch poet. Author of Auld Robin
Gray.

=Barnfield, Richard.= 1574-c. 1605. Poet. His ode "As it fell upon a
day" was once ascribed to Shakespeare. _See Warton's Eng. Poetry._

=Barrow, Isaac.= 1630-1677. Theologian and mathematician. Author of
Sermons and Mathematical works of almost equal renown. _See Selections
from, pub. 1866._ _Pub. Mac._

=Barton, Bernard.= 1784-1849. A Friend of Lamb's. "The Quaker Poet."
Author of Poetic Vigils, Devotional Verses, etc., the literary merit
of which is but slight.

=Baxter, Richard.= 1615-1691. Theologian. A voluminous writer, but now
best known by his Saints' Rest, and Call to the Unconverted. _See
edition of 1850 in 23 vols. with Life._ _Pub. Clx._

=Bayley, Thos. Haynes.= 1797-1839. Song writer. Author of I'd be a
Butterfly, She wore a Wreath of Roses, We met, 't was in a Crowd, etc.

=Bayne, Peter.= 183 Essayist and biographer. Author of Christian
Life, Essays in Biographical Criticism, Life of Hugh Miller, etc.
_Pub. Har. Rou._

=Beale, Lionel Smith.= 182 Scientific writer of note. Author of
How to Work with the Microscope, Protoplasm, The Mystery of Life, etc.

=Beattie [bee't[)i] or b[=a]'t[)i]], James.= 1735-1803. Scotch poet.
Author of The Minstrel, a long, prosy poem in Spenserian stanza, and a
prose Essay on Truth. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._ _Pub. Hou._

=Beaumont, Francis.= 1586-1615. Dramatist. Colleague of John Fletcher.
Their collected plays amount to 52, of which 14 were in part the work
of B., but his separate authorship is not easy to trace. B. and F. in
their day were more popular than Shakespeare, but none of their plays
now keep the stage. Their blank verse is melodious and their wit and
humor sparkling, but their plays reflect the full coarseness of the
time. Among plays written by them jointly are Philaster, Thierry and
Theodoret, A King and No King, and the comedy of The Knight of the
Burning Pestle. See Fletcher, John. _See Schlegel's Dramatic Lit.,
Hazlitt's Dramatic Lit. and Hallam's Lit. of Europe._ _Pub. Apl._

=Beaumont, Sir John.= 1582-1628. Bro. to F. B. Author Bosworth Field,
a poem in heroic verse.

=Beckford, Wm.= 1760-1844. Author of Vathek, an Oriental romance.
Style luxuriant. _See Chambers' Cyc. Eng. Lit._

=Beddoes, Thos. Lovell.= 1803-1849. Poet. Author The Bride's Tragedy,
Death's Jest-Book, etc. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4._

=Bede, Cuthbert.= See Bradley, Edward.

=Bede, Beda, or Baeda, The Venerable.= 673-735. "First among Eng.
scholars, first among Eng. theologians, first among Eng. historians."
His whole life was passed in the monastery of Yarrow, where he
composed more than 40 Latin works, the greatest of which is the Eccl.
Hist. of the Eng. Nation. On the day of his death was finished his
translation of St. John's Gospel into Eng., being the earliest example
of Eng. prose. _See edition of Bede by Dr. Giles, 6 vols. 1843-4. See
Green's Short Hist. of the Eng. People, also Green's Making of
England._ _Pub. Dut._

=Behn= [b[)e]n], =Mrs. Aphra.= 1642-1689. Novelist and dramatist.
Known in her day as Astraea. Author of The Forced Marriage, Oronooko,
etc. A lively, immoral writer. _See edition of 1871. See Miss
Kavanagh's Eng. Women of Letters, and Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Bellenden, Wm.= fl. c. 1615. Scotch classical writer. Author De
Statu.

=Bentham, Jeremy.= 1748-1832. Philosopher and political economist.
Founder of the Utilitarian school of thought, and a valued authority
upon jurisprudence. Many reforms in Eng. jurisprudence are traceable
to his influence. _See edition of 1843 in 11 vols. See Edinburgh Rev.
Oct. 1843._

=Bentley, Richard.= 1662-1742. Classical writer. Author Dissertations
on the Epistles of Phalaris, works provoked by his famous controversy
with Boyle, and which rank as masterpieces of argument. They display
great learning, a rapid, concise style, and a sarcastic wit. _See
Bentley, by R. C. Jebb, in Eng. Men of Letters._

=Berkeley, George.= 1684-1753. Bp. Cloyne. Irish metaphysician. An
eccentric but pure-minded thinker, in whose Principles of Human
Knowledge is denied the existence of matter. Other works of B. are
Alciphron or the Minute Philosopher, Theory of Vision, Siris, etc.
Also the poem in which occurs the famous line, "Westward the course of
empire takes its way." _See edition of Berkeley, by Fraser, 4 vols.
Oxford, 1871._

=Berners, Lord.= 1469-1532. Translator of Froissart's Chronicle. The
translation is faithful and is a masterpiece of picturesque and
spirited English.

=Berners, Juliana.= c. 1388-c. 1461. Author of the Bokys of Hunting
and Hawking. _See Warton's Hist. Eng. Poetry._

=Besant, Walter.= 183 Novelist. Colleague of James Rice, and
with him author of The Seamy Side, Ready Money Mortiboy, the Chaplain
of the Fleet, Shepherds All and Maidens Fair, etc. Sole author of The
Revolt of Man, Life of E. H. Palmer, etc. See Rice, James. _Pub. Har.
Rob. Dut._

=Beveridge, Wm.= 1638-1708. Bp. St. Asaph. Theologian. Thesaurus
Theologicus, Expositions of the Catechism and 39 Articles, and Private
Thoughts are some of his chief works.

=Bickerstaff, Isaac.= 1735-c. 1788. Dramatist. Author of Maid of the
Mill, Love in a Village, etc. _See Hazlitt's Essays on the Comic
Writers._

=Bickersteth, Edward.= 1786-1850. Religious writer. Author of The
Scripture Help, etc. _See edition of his Works in 17 vols. 1853. See
Memoir of, by T. R. Birks, 1851._

=Bickersteth, Edward Henry.= 182 Son to E. B. Religious Poet.
Author of Yesterday, To-Day and Forever, The Two Brothers, etc. _Pub.
Ca. Dut._

=Bickersteth, Rob't.= 181 Bp. Ripon. Religious writer. Author of
Lent Lectures, Bible Landmarks, etc.

=Birch, Thomas.= 1705-1766. Historian and biographer. Author of a
General Dictionary, Historical and Critical.

=Black, Wm.= 184 Novelist. A prolific writer, the best of whose
works are A Daughter of Heth, Princess of Thule, Strange Adventures of
a Phaeton, and Macleod of Dare. They evince rare powers of description
and much constructive skill. _See Harper's Mag. Dec. 1882._ _Pub.
Har._

=Blackie, John Stuart.= 180 Scotch poet and scholar. For 30
years Greek Professor at Edinburgh Univ. His numerous works include
Greek, Latin, and German translations, several vols. of poems, and a
famous work on Self-Culture which has been translated into every
European language. _Pub. Scr._

=Blackmore, Sir Richard.= 1650-1729. Poet. Author of the epics The
Creation, and Prince Arthur.

=Blackmore, Richard Doddridge.= 182 Novelist. Author Lorna
Doone, Maid of Sker, Alice Lorraine, Erema, Mary Anerly, Christowell,
etc. A vigorous and original writer. Lorna Doone is his finest work.
_Pub. Har. Lip._

=Blackstone, Sir Wm.= 1723-1780. Jurist. Author of Commentaries on the
Laws of England, an authoritative work. _See Campbell's Lives of the
Chief Justices._ _Pub. Har. Lip._

=Blair, Hugh.= 1718-1800. Author of the once famous Lectures on
Rhetoric. _Pub. Por._

=Blair, Robert.= 1699-1747. Poet. Author of The Grave, a dull,
didactic, but once popular poem. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._

=Blake, Wm.= 1757-1827. Artist and poet. Author of Poetical Sketches,
Songs of Innocence and Experience, etc. A writer of rare simplicity
and beauty. An Elizabethan poet of the 19th cent. _See editions of his
poems by Shepherd and Rossetti, and Life by Gilchrist, 1863 and 1881,
also Swinburne's Study of Blake, 1863._ _Pub. Rob._

=Blamire, Susanna.= 1747-1794. Poet. Author of the fine lyrics, The
Siller Crown, What Ails this Heart o' Mine, etc.

=Blanchard, Edward Laman.= 182 Dramatist and novelist.

=Blanchard, Laman.= 1803-1845. Litterateur. _See Bulwer's Memoir of,
with Blanchard's Essays and Sketches, 1849._

=Blessington, Marguerite, Countess of.= 1789-1849. Society novelist.
_See Life and Correspondence edited by D. R. Madden._

=Bloomfield, Robert.= 1766-1823. Pastoral poet. Author of The Farmer's
Boy, Rural Tales, The Horkey, etc. _Pub Por. Rou._

=Blunt, John Henry.= 182 Theologian. Author Hist. Reformation in
Ch. of England and editor Dict. Sects and Heresies, etc. _Pub. Dut._

=Blunt, John James.= 1794-1855. Ecclesiologist. Author Hist. Christian
Ch. in the first three centuries, etc. _Pub. Ca._

=Bolingbroke, Lord.= See St. John, Henry.

=Bonar, Horatius.= 180 Scotch poet. Author Hymns of Faith and
Hope, etc. _Pub. Ca._

=Borrow, George.= 1803-1881. Author of Gipsies of Spain, Bible in
Spain, Lavengro, The Romany Rye, Romany Word Book, etc. _See
Autobiography, 1851._ _Pub. Ca. Har._

=Boswell [boz'well], Alexander.= 1775-1822. Poet. Son to J. B. His
song, Jenny Dang the Weaver, is his best known production.

=Boswell, James.= 1740-1795. Biographer. His Life of Dr. Samuel
Johnson is an incomparable work. _Pub. Ho. Lit. Rou._

=Boswell, James.= 1779-1822. Son to preceding. Shakespearean scholar.

=Boucicault [boo-se-ko'], Dion.= 182 Dramatist. Among his very
numerous popular plays, London Assurance, Rip Van Winkle, The Corsican
Brothers, Led Astray, and the Shaughran are perhaps the best. _See
Johnson's Cyc._

=Bowles, Wm. Lisle.= 1762-1850. Poet. Author Fourteen Sonnets, Village
Verse Book, etc. A graceful writer, to whom Wordsworth and Coleridge
attributed their own poetic inspiration.

=Bowring [bour'ing], Sir John.= 1792-1872. Philologist and poet. Best
known as a writer of hymns of great beauty, among others, the familiar
Watchman, Tell us of the Night. _See Autobiographical Recollections,
1877._ _Pub. Dut._

=Boyd, Andrew Kennedy Hutchinson.= 182 Scotch essayist. Author
of Essays by a Country Parson, Graver Thoughts, Autumn Holidays, etc.
He signed his essays with his initials A. K. H. B.

=Boyle, Chas.= 1676-1731. Famous for his controversy with Bentley
concerning the Epistles of Phalaris. See Bentley, Richard.

=Boyle, Robert.= 1626-1691. Philosopher. A voluminous writer upon
metaphysics and natural sciences.

=Braddon, Miss.= See Maxwell, Mrs. Mary E.

=Bradley, Edward.= "Cuthbert Bede." 182 Humorist. Author
Adventures of Verdant Green, etc.

=Bradley, James.= 1692-1762. Astronomical writer.

=Brady, Nicholas.= 1659-1726. Chiefly known for his share in the
version of the Psalms prepared by him with Nahum Tate.

=Bray, Mrs. Anna Eliza.= 1790-1883. Miscellaneous writer of note. _See
Lit. World, Feb. 24, 1883._

=Brewer, E. Cobham.= 181 Author Reader's Handbook, Dict. Phrase
and Fable, Guide to Science, etc. Well edited and valuable books of
reference. _Pub. Clx. Lip._

=Brewster, Sir David.= 1781-1868. Scientist. Author Natural Magic,
More Worlds than One, Lives of Newton, Kepler, etc. _See Life, by his
daughter, 1869._ _Pub. Har._

=Bronte [br[=o]n'te], Anne.= 1820-1849. Novelist. Sister to C. B.
Author of Tenant of Wildfell Hall and Agnes Gray. _Pub. Har._

=Bronte, Charlotte.= 1816-1855. Sister to A. B. and E. B. Novelist.
Author of The Professor, Jane Eyre, Shirley, and Villette. A writer of
great power and originality, whose Jane Eyre marks an era in the
history of fiction. _See Charlotte Bronte by T. W. Reid, 1877; Life of
by Mrs. Gaskell, and H. Martineau's Biographical Sketches._ _Pub.
Har._

=Bronte, Emily.= 1819-1848. Sister to C. B. Novelist. Her Wuthering
Heights shows in places greater power than either of her sisters
possessed, but as a whole is strained and unnatural. _See Ward's Eng.
Poets, vol. 4. Emily Bronte, by A. Mary F. Robinson, and London
Athaenum, June 16, 1883._ _Pub. Har._

=Brooke, Arthur.= ---- c. 1563. Poet. Wrote the Tragical Hist. of Romeo
and Juliet, a paraphrase of Bandello's novel, the source of
Shakespeare's drama.

=Brooke, Charlotte.= ---- 1793. Daughter to H. B. Author of Reliques of
Irish Poetry translated into Eng. verse, etc.

=Brooke, Mrs. Frances Moore.= 1745-1789. Author of several novels, the
opera Rosina, and a periodical called The Old Maid.

=Brooke, Henry.= 1706-1783. Author of plays, poems, and a once famous
novel called The Fool of Quality. _Pub. Mac._

=Brooke, Lord.= See Greville Fulk.

=Brooke, Stopford.= 183 Religious writer. Author Life of F. W.
Robertson, Freedom in the Ch. of England, Christ in Modern Life,
Theology in the Eng. Poets, Primer of Eng. Lit., Sermons, etc. Style
clear, thoughtful, and strong. _Pub. Apl. Mac._

=Brooks, Chas. Shirley.= 1815-1874. Dramatist and Novelist. Author
Poems of Wit and Humor, The Gordian Knot, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Broome, Richard.= ---- 1562. Dramatist. Wrote in conjunction with
others.

=Brougham [broo'am or broo'm], Henry, Lord.= 1779-1868. Statesman and
orator. A man of strong intellect, whose speeches are among the ablest
of his time. A versatile writer, among whose numerous works are
Eloquence of the Ancients and Lives of Men of Letters. _See
Autobiography pub. 1871; Edinburgh Rev. April, 1858, and Life by Lord
Campbell. His works in 10 vols., pub. 1857._

=Broughton, Rhoda.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Author of Red as a Rose is
She, Nancy, Belinda, etc. Style spirited, but wanting in refinement of
expression. _Pub. Lit._

=Brown, John.= 1810-1882. Scotch essayist and physician. Best known by
his exquisite story of Rab and his Friends. _Pub. Hou._

=Brown, Thomas.= 1778-1820. Scotch philosophical writer.

=Brown, Tom.= 1663-1704. Humorous and immoral poet and miscellaneous
writer.

=Browne, Edward Harold.= 181 Bp. Winchester. Theologian. Author
of The Pentateuch and Elohistic Psalms, Sermons on the Atonement, etc.
_Pub. Dut._

=Browne, Isaac Hawkins.= 1706-1760. Poet. Author of A Pipe of Tobacco,
etc.

=Browne, Sir Thos.= 1605-1682. Author of a treatise on Christian
Morals, Religio Medici, Hydriotaphia or Urn-Burial, etc. A writer of
striking genius whose works will always attract thoughtful readers.
Style meditative and imaginative, but frequently obscure. _See
complete edition in Bohn's Antiquarian Library._ _Pub. Mac. Rob._

=Browne, Wm.= 1590-1645. Poet. Wrote Britannia's Pastorals, Shepherd's
Pipe, etc. His style is easy and harmonious, and some of his lyrics
are yet read.

=Browning, Mrs. Elizabeth Barrett.= 1809-1861. Poet. By many critics
given the highest place among poets of her sex, but her verse, in the
main, appeals to a limited class of readers. It has a masculine
strength, a passionate vehemence of expression, and it is often
pathetic and tender, but its frequent obscurity is a grave defect.
Aurora Leigh, Casa Guidi Windows, and Sonnets from the Portuguese, are
among her chief works. _See Letters of, edited by R. H. Hone, 1877,
Contemporary Rev. 1873, and Stedman's Victorian Poets._ _Pub. Mil._

=Browning, Robert.= 181 Poet. Husband to E. B. B. Author of a
long series of poems, some of them obscure and enigmatical to the last
degree, but all bearing the marks of great genius. Paracelsus,
Sordello, Pippa Passes, The King and The Book, Fifine at the Fair, and
Jocoseria are some of them. His circle of sincere admirers is small,
but shorter poems of his, like Herve Riel, and the Pied Piper of
Hamelin, are widely known and read. _See Lit. World, March 11, 1882,
Century Mag. December, 1881, and Stedman's Victorian Poets._ _Pub.
Hou._

=Brunton, Mrs. Mary Balfour.= 1778-1818. Scotch novelist. Author Self
Control and Discipline. _Pub. Har._

=Bryant, Jacob.= 1715-1804. Classical and mythological writer.

=Bryce, James.= 181 Historian. Author Native Education in India,
and The Holy Roman Empire. _Pub. Har. Mac._

=Brydges, Sir Sam'l Egerton.= 1762-1837. A prolific writer in verse
and prose. Style often fantastic and eccentric.

=Buchanan, George.= 1506-1582. Scotch poet and historian. Wrote a
Latin version of the Psalms, and a Latin Hist. of Scotland. _See
Hallam's Lit. of Europe._

=Buchanan, Robert.= 184 Scotch poet. Author Idyls and Legends,
London Poems, Balder the Beautiful, etc. A writer of some power, but
one whose verse is marred by frequent affectations. _See Stedman's
Victorian Poets, and Contemporary Rev. November, 1873._ _Pub. Har.
Hou. Rou._

=Buckhurst, Lord.= See Sackville, Thos.

=Buckingham, Duke of.= See Villiers, George.

=Buckinghamshire, Duke of.= See Sheffield, John.

=Buckland, Francis Trevelyan.= 1826-1880. Naturalist. Son to W. B.
Author Curiosities of Nat. Hist., Familiar Hist. British Fishes, etc.

=Buckland, Wm.= 1784-1856. Geological writer of note.

=Buckle, Henry Thos.= 1822-1862. Historian. His great work, The Hist.
of Civilization, was left unfinished. His style is easy and flowing,
but his inferences and conclusions are frequently controverted. _See
Atlantic Monthly, Jan. and April, 1863._ _Pub. Apl._

=Budgell, Eustace.= 1685-1736. Essayist. Author of all the papers in
the Spectator signed X.

=Bull, George.= 1634-1710. Bp. St. David's. Theologian. An opponent of
Calvinism, against which his Latin treatise, Harmonia Apostolica, is
aimed.

=Bulwer-Lytton, Sir Edward Geo.= 1805-1873. Novelist and Poet. Several
of his 25 novels, like The Caxtons, My Novel, Harold, and Kenelm
Chillingly, are masterpieces of their kind. Others as well known are
Pelham, Zanoni, Last Days of Pompeii, Rienzi, etc. Richelieu, Money,
and Lady of Lyons are his most popular dramas. King Arthur and The
New Timon are two of his longer poems. _See Memoir, by Lord Lytton,
Quarterly Rev., Jan. 1865, Blackwood's Mag. Mar., 1873, and Tennyson's
poem The New Timon._ _Pub. Har._

=Bulwer-Lytton, Edward Robert.= "Owen Meredith." 183 Poet. Son
to preceding. Author of Lucile, Fables in Verse, The Ring of Amasis,
etc. His verse has melody and strength, but Lucile, his chief poem, a
novel in verse, is asserted to be a plagiarism. _See Stedman's
Victorian Poets._

=Bunyan, John.= 1628-1688. Allegorist. Author Pilgrim's Progress, Holy
War, etc. The first named is the most famous allegory in the world.
The product of a strong, vivid imagination, it holds the attention of
cultured and uncultured minds alike. _See Biographies of, by Southey,
and Macaulay, and Bunyan, by J. A. Froude in Eng. Men of Letters._

=Burke, Edmund.= 1730-1797. Orator and statesman. As a political
writer he has few equals. Among his best efforts are Letters on a
Regicide Peace, Letters to a Noble Lord, and Orations on the
Impeachment of Warren Hastings. Style polished and cultured. _See
Morley's Life of, 1867. See select works edited by E. J. Payne, 1874._

=Burnand, Francis Cowley.= 183 Author Happy Thoughts, The New
History of Sanford and Merton, etc. _Pub. Rob._

=Burnet, Gilbert.= 1643-1715. Bp. Salisbury. Historian. Author Hist.
Reformation, Hist. My Own Times, etc. A vivacious, diffuse narrator.
_See Macaulay's Hist. of England._ _Pub. Dut. Mac._

=Burnet, James.= Lord Monboddo. 1714-1799. An eccentric writer, noted
for his theory that mankind once had tails, which the habit of
sitting on had worn away.

=Burnet, Thos.= 1635-1715. Author Telluris Sacra Theoria, a fantastic
system of Geology, written in an eloquent and majestic style.

=Burney, Charles.= 1726-1814. Author Gen. Hist. of Music, Life of
Metastasio, etc. _See Life, by his daughter, Madame D'Arblay._

=Burney, Frances.= See D'Arblay, Madame.

=Burns, Robert.= 1759-1796. Scotch poet. A singer of love songs. His
verse shows a gentle, tender spirit, and a sympathy for all created
things, new to the poetry of his day. Tam O'Shanter, Twa Dogs, and The
Jolly Beggars, show the humorous side of his nature. The Cotter's
Saturday Night, Auld Lang Syne, A Man's a Man for a' That, are
universally known, and some of his lyrics will last as long as the
language. _See Carlyle's Misc. Essays; Craik's Eng. Lit. vol. 2; also
Burns, by Shairp, in Eng. Men of Letters._ _Pub. Apl. Har. Hou. Por._

=Burton, John Hill.= 1809-1881. Scotch historian. Author Life and
Correspondence of David Hume, Hist. Reign of Q. Anne, Hist. Scotland,
etc.

=Burton, Robert.= 1576-1640. Author of Anatomy of Melancholy. Style
fantastic, original, and diffuse. _Pub. Apl. Clx. Dut._

=Butler, Alban.= 1710-1773. Author Lives of the Fathers, Saints, etc.,
Letters on the Hist. of the Popes, etc. _See edition of the Lives,
1812, with Life of A. Butler by Chas. Butler._

=Butler, Charles.= 1750-1832. Neph. to A. B. Author Horae Biblicae,
continuation of the Lives of the Saints, etc. _See Alibone's Dict._

=Butler, Joseph.= 1692-1752. Bp. Bristol. Theologian. His great work,
Analogy between Natural and Revealed Religion, is much studied and
admired. _See edition of his works, 1867._ _Pub. Har._

=Butler, Samuel.= 1612-1680. Satirical poet. His Hudibras, written in
ridicule of the Puritans, is witty and spirited, but too long for the
taste of modern readers. _See edition of his works by Gilfillan,
1854._ _Pub. Apl._

=Butler, Wm. Archer.= 1814-1848. Author Lect. on Hist. of Ancient
Philosophy, etc. _See Woodward's Life of._ _Pub. Ca. Mac._

=Byrd, Wm.= 1540-1623. Poet. Author of the famous lines beginning, "My
mind to me a kingdom is."

=Byrom, John.= 1691-1763. Pastoral poet.

=Byron, Henry James.= 183 Dramatist. Author Babes in the Wood,
Our Boys, Not such a Fool as he Looks, Good News, etc.

=Byron, Lord.= See Gordon, George.




=Caedmon [k[=a]d'm[o)]n].= ---- c. 680. Anglo-Saxon poet. A monk of
Whitby, who wrote about 670 a metrical paraphrase of the Scriptures.
It is accented and alliterative, like all Anglo-Saxon poetry, and
marks the beginning of Eng. poetry. _See Thorpe's edition of, London,
1832._

=Calamy, Edmund.= 1600-1666. Theological writer.

=Calamy, Edmund.= 1671-1732. Grandson to preceding. Author of the
Nonconformists' Memorial, Defence of Moderate Nonconformity, etc. _See
his history of his Life and Times, edited by Rutt, 1829._

=Calverley, Chas. Stuart.= 183 Poet. Author of Fly-Leaves,
translation of Theocritus, etc. _Pub. Ho._

=Camden, Wm.= 1551-1623. Antiquary. Author of Britannia, a Latin
description of Britain, etc.

=Campbell, George.= 1709-1796. Scotch theologian. Author Dissertations
on Miracles, Philosophy of Rhetoric, Lect. on Eccl. Hist., etc. _Pub.
Har._

=Campbell, John.= 1708-1775. Historical and political writer.

=Campbell, John,= _Lord Chancellor_. 1779-1861. Biographer. Author
Lives of the Lord Chancellors, and Lives of the Chief Justices. _See
Edinburgh Rev. Oct. 1857; and see H. Martineau's Biographical
Sketches._ _Pub. Apl. Lit._

=Campbell, Thomas.= 1774-1844. Scotch poet. Author Pleasures of Hope,
Gertrude of Wyoming, etc., poems artificial in cast. His lyrics, like
Hohenlinden, Ye Mariners of England, etc., are fine specimens of lyric
verse. _See Life of by Dr. Beattie, 1849. See W. M. Rossetti's edition
of his poems with critical introduction._

=Canning, George.= 1770-1827. Writer of witty parodies. Needy
Knife-Grinder, etc.

=Carew, Lady Elizabeth.= Fl. c. 1613. Author of the tragedy of Marian.

=Carew, Thomas.= 1589-1639. Poet. His poems are brief and mainly
amatory in character. _See complete edition by W. Carew Hazlitt. See
Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Carey, Henry.= 1663-1743. Dramatist and poet. Author
Chrononhotonthologos, The Dragon of Wantley, the ballad of Sally in
our Alley, and God Save the King.

=Carleton, Wm.= 1798-1869. Irish novelist. Style vigorous and
picturesque. _Pub. Rou._

=Carlyle, Thomas.= 1795-1881. Essayist and historian. Author of
Essays, Chartism, Heroes and Hero-Worship, Sartor Resartus, Past and
Present, Latter-Day Pamphlets, Life of Sterling, History French
Revolution, Life of Frederick the Great, etc. A vigorous, opinionated
writer, with a style which is vivid and picturesque, but often wordy
and obscure. A man of great but wayward intellectual powers. _See
Eclectic Mag. 1881. Reminiscences by Carlyle; Letters of Jane Welsh
Carlyle, and Emerson and Carlyle._ _Pub. Hon. Har. Lip._

=Carpenter, Lant.= 1780-1840. Theological writer.

=Carpenter, Wm. Benj.= 181 Physiologist of note. Son to L. C.
Author of Principles of Human Physiology, Zoology, and the Instinct of
Animals, The Microscope, etc. _Pub. Apl._

=Carr, J. Comyns.= 184 Art Critic and Editor. Author of Drawing
by the Italian Masters, St. Albans, Essays, etc.

=Carte, Thos.= 1686-1754. Historian. Author Hist. England to 1654.

=Carter, Elizabeth.= 1717-1806. Classical writer. Author of a
translation of Epictetus and original poems. The most learned woman of
her time.

=Cartwright, Wm.= 1611-1643. Poet. He enjoyed a great reputation in
his day.

=Carey, Henry Francis.= 1772-1844. Poet. Author of a much admired
blank verse translation of Dante. _See Memoirs of, by his son, 1847._

=Caxton, Wm.= 1412-1492. The first Eng. printer. Was author and
translator of some 60 books.

=Cayley, Arthur.= 182 Mathematical writer.

=Cecil [s[)e]s'il or sis'il], Wm.= 1520-1598. Statesman. Author of
Precepts addressed to his son.

=Centlivre [sent-l[)i]v'er], Mrs. Susanna.= 1680-1723. Dramatist. Her
best comedies are The Busybody and The Wonder, the last of which still
keeps the stage. _See Atlantic Monthly, June, 1882._

=Challoner, Bp. Richard.= 1691-1781. Author of an Eng. version of the
Bible, Grounds of the Catholic Doctrine, etc.

=Chalmers [chaw'merz], George.= 1742-1825. Scotch historian.

=Chalmers, Thomas.= 1780-1847. Scotch theologian. The most powerful
preacher of his time. Author of Natural Theology, Christian Evidences,
etc. _See Memoirs of, by Wm. Hanna; do. by F. Wayland; also, Spare
Hours, 1st series, by Dr. John Brown._ _Pub. Har._

=Chamberlayne, Wm.= 1619-1689. Poet. Author Love's Victory and
Pharonidia.

=Chambers, Robert.= 1802-1871. Scotch publisher. Author of the noted
Vestiges of the Nat. Hist. of Creation, etc. _See Memoirs of, by W.
Chambers._

=Chambers, Wm.= 1800-1883. Scotch publisher. Bro. to R. C. Author
Memoirs of Rob't Chambers, Wintering at Mentone, etc. The brothers
were joint editors of many popular works: Information for the People,
Encyclopaedia, Book of Days, Miscellany, etc. _Pub. Lip._

=Chapman, George.= 1557-1634. Dramatist. Chiefly noted for a fine
translation of Homer in 14-syllable verse. _See his Homer, 4 vols.,
London, 1858_; _Dramatic Works, 1873_; _George Chapman, by Swinburne._

=Chapone [sh[)a]-p[=o]n'], Mrs. Hester.= 1727-1801. Author of
treatises on Morals and Philosophy.

=Charles, Mrs. Elizabeth Rundle.= 182 Author of the noted
Schoenberg-Cotta Family, and other excellent semi-religious stories.
_Pub. Do._

=Charlesworth, Maria Louisa.= 1830-1880. Author of much religious
fiction, of which Ministering Children is the best example. _Pub. Apl.
Ca._

=Chatham, Lord.= See Pitt, Wm.

=Chatterton, Thomas.= 1752-1770. Poet. Author of imitations of old
Eng. poetry, which for a short time deceived the scholars of that day,
and as the work of a boy of 17 were very remarkable. _See Chatterton,
a Biographical Study, by Daniel Wilson, London, 1870._ _Pub. Hou._

=Chaucer, Geoffrey.= 1340-1400. Poet. Author of numerous lesser poems,
but The Canterbury Tales is his greatest work. He is rightly called
the Father of Eng. Song, since it is with him that Eng. poetry really
begins. He gave form to the language, and blended the French and Eng.
influences into a harmonious whole. His verse, in the main, is easy
and musical, and shows a love of nature. _See publications of the
Chaucer Society._ _Chaucer, by A. W. Ward._ _See Gilman's edition of
Chaucer in 3 vols., 1879._ _Pub. Hou._

=Chesterfield, Earl of.= See Stanhope, Philip.

=Chettle, Henry. Fl.= c. 1600. Dramatist. Prolific, but valueless.

=Chillingworth, Wm.= 1602-1644. Theologian. Author of Religion of
Protestants a Safe Way to Salvation, a celebrated work. _See Oxford
edition, 3 vols., 8vo, 1838._

=Chitty, Joseph.= 1776-1841. Jurist. Author of Practical Treatise on
Criminal Law, Synopsis of Practice, and other invaluable legal
text-books. _Pub. Lip._

=Chorley, Henry Fothergill.= 1808-1872. Musical critic. Author Thirty
Years' Musical Recollections, Criticisms on Modern German Music, etc.,
and of numerous songs and opera librettos. _See Autobiography, Memoirs
and Letters, 2 vols., London, 1873._ _Pub. Ho._

=Christmas, Henry.= See Noel-Fearn.

=Church, Alfred John.= 182 Stories from Homer, Stories from
Virgil, Poems, etc. Of the poems, Unseen is one of the best. _Pub.
Har._

=Church, Richard Wm.= 181 Author Life of Anselm, University
Sermons, Civilization before and after Christianity, Sacred Poetry of
Early Religions, Spenser in Eng. Men of Letters, etc. _Pub. Har. Mac._

=Churchill, Charles.= 1731-1764. Satirical poet. The Rosciad is his
chief work. Was at one time an extremely popular poet. _See Essay on,
by Macaulay._

=Cibber [s[)i]b'ber], Colley.= 1671-1757. Dramatist. Author of The
Careless Husband, She Would and She Would Not, and some 20 other
plays. _See his Apology for his Life._

=Clare, John.= 1793-1864. Pastoral poet. Author Poems of Rural Life
and Scenery, etc. Some of his verse has great beauty. _See J. L.
Cherry's Life of, London, 1873._

=Clarendon, Earl of.= See Hyde, Edward.

=Clarke, Adam.= 1760-1832. Irish bibliographer. Author Commentary on
the Bible, Bibliographical Dict., Succession of Sacred Lit., etc. An
industrious, careful writer. _Pub. Phi._

=Clarke, Charles Cowden.= 1787-1877. Author of Shakespeare Characters,
Moliere Characters, Riches of Chaucer, etc. _Pub. Scr._

=Clarke, Mrs. Mary Cowden.= 180 Wife to C. C. C. Shakespearean
scholar. Author of the noted Concordance of Shakespeare, World-Noted
Women, and several vols. of verse. With her husband was editor of an
annotated edition of Shakespeare, 1869. _Pub. Cas. Lit._

=Clarke, Samuel.= 1675-1729. Metaphysician. Author of numerous
metaphysical works written in a simple yet vigorous and eloquent
style.

=Cleveland, John.= 1613-1658. Poet. A famous Cavalier writer. His
verse is satirical and amatory in character.

=Clifford, Wm. Kingdon.= 1845-1879. Scientist. Author Lect. and
Essays, Elements of Dynamics, Seeing and Thinking, and Mathematical
Papers. _See biographical introduction to Lect. and Essays, by F.
Pollock._ _Pub. Mac._

=Clive, Mrs. Archer.= 180 Novelist. Author Paul Ferrol, Why Paul
Ferrol Killed his Wife, etc.

=Clough [kluf], Arthur Hugh.= 1819-1861. Author of The Bothie of
Tober-na Vuolich, Amours de Voyage, both hexameter poems, Dipsychus,
and minor poems. His verse shows a mastery of metre and a thoughtful,
earnest spirit. _See Atlantic Monthly, April, 1862_; _Hutton's Essays;
Matthew Arnold's Essays in Criticism_; _Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4._
_Pub. Ho. Mac._

=Cobbe, Frances Power.= 182 Philosophical writer. Author of
Intuitive Morals, Religious Duty, Darwinism in Morals, The Peak in
Darien, Duties of Women, etc. A clear, able, and vigorous writer.
_Pub. El._

=Cobbett, Wm.= 1762-1835. Political writer. Style idiomatic and
rancorous. _See Robert Walker's How to Get on in the World, as
Demonstrated by the Life and Language of William Cobbett._

=Cobden, Richard.= 1804-1865. Statesman. _See Political Writings of
London, 1867_; _Speeches, etc., in London, 1870_; _Gilchrist's Life
of, 1865_; _and Recollections of, by Ashworth_. _Pub. Apl._

=Cockburn [k[=o]'burn], Henry Thos., Lord.= 1779-1854. Jurist. Author
Life and Correspondence of Lord Jeffrey, and Memorials of his Times.

=Coke, Sir Edward.= c. 1549-1634. Jurist. Best known by his famous
Coke upon Littleton, or the First Institute.

=Colenso, John Wm.= 1814-1883. Bp. Natal. Theologian. Author of The
Pentateuch and Joshua Critically Examined, Lect. on the Pentateuch and
Moabite Stone, etc. An able and vigorous writer.

=Coleridge [k[=o]l'r[)i]j], Hartley.= 1796-1849. Poet. Son to S. T. C.
Author of Poems, Essays, Life of Massinger, etc. Style in both prose
and verse clear and beautiful. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4._

=Coleridge, Henry Nelson.= 1800-1843. Neph. to S. T. C. Essayist.
Style able and scholarly.

=Coleridge, John Taylor.= 1790-1876. Neph. to S. T. C. Author of an
annotated Blackstone, Memoir of John Keble, etc.

=Coleridge, Samuel Taylor.= 1772-1834. Poet and philosopher. Author of
The Ancient Mariner, Christabel, Kubla Khan, etc., in verse; Lect. on
Shakespeare, Table-Talk, The Friend, Biographia Literaria, etc., in
prose. A man of great genius, who accomplished little commensurate
with it. His best, however, is unsurpassable. _See 9 vol. edition, N.
Y., 1853-4._ _See Gilman's Life of_; _Personal Recollections of Joseph
Cottle_.

=Coleridge, Sara.= 1803-1852. Dau. to S. T. C. and wife to H. N. C.
Editor of her father's works, and author of the exquisite romance
Phantasmion. A writer of much critical ability. _See Memoir of._ _Pub.
Har. 1873._

=Collier, Jeremy.= 1650-1726. Theologian. His famous pamphlet against
the immorality of the stage greatly helped to purify Eng. literature.

=Collier, John Payne.= 1789-1883. Shakespearean scholar. Best known in
connection with the famous Collier MSS. of Notes and Emendations to
the text of Shakespeare. _See Atlantic Monthly, Oct., 1859, and Sept.,
1861._ _Pub. Scr._

=Collins, Mortimer.= 1827-1876. Novelist. Author Sweet Anne Page,
Marquis and Merchant, etc. _Pub. Apl. Har._

=Collins, Wm.= 1720-1756. Poet. Famous for his musical odes, as The
Passions, Evening, and the poem How Sleep the Brave. C. occupies a
high place among minor poets. _See Johnson's Lives of the Poets._

=Collins, Wm. Wilkie.= 182 Novelist. Excels all other novelists
in the construction of plots. The Woman in White is his most famous
story. _Pub. Har._

=Colman, George.= 1733-1794. Dramatist. Composed nearly 30 comedies,
of which The Jealous Wife is one of the best.

=Colman, George.= The Younger. 1762-1836. Dramatist. Son to preceding.
A writer of spirited comedies, such as The Heir-at-Law, Poor
Gentleman, John Bull, The Iron Chest, etc.

=Combe [koom], Andrew.= 1797-1847. Scotch physiological writer. _Pub.
Har._

=Combe, George.= 1788-1858. Scotch phrenologist. Bro. to A. C. Author
Constitution of Man, etc. _See H. Martineau's Biographical Sketches
and Capen's Reminiscences of G. Combe._ _Pub. Har._

=Congreve [k[)o]ng'gr[=e]v], Wm.= 1670-1729. Dramatist. Author of the
tragedy of The Mourning Bride, and of The Double Dealer, Old Bachelor,
Love for Love, and other coarse but brilliant comedies. _See edition
by Leigh Hunt, London, 1849._

=Conybeare [k[)u]n'[)i]-b[)e]r], John.= 1692-1755. Theologian of note.

=Conybeare, John Josias.= 1779-1824. Grandson to J. C. Antiquary.
Author of Illustrations of Anglo-Saxon Poetry, a work of much value.

=Conybeare, Wm. Daniel.= 1787-1857. Geological writer of note.

=Conybeare, Wm. John.= ---- 1857. Theologian. Author with Dean Howson
of The Life and Epistles of St. Paul. _Pub. Ran. Scr._

=Cook, Eliza.= 181 Poet. Author of The Old Arm Chair, etc. Style
simple and tender.

=Coombe [koom], Wm.= 1741-1823. A voluminous satirical and humorous
writer, best known by his poem Dr. Syntax. _Pub. Rou._

=Cooper, Anthony Ashley.= 3d Earl of Shaftesbury. 1671-1713. Ethical
writer. Author of Characteristics of Men, etc.

=Copleston [kop'[e^]l-st[o^]n], Edward.= 1776-1849. Bp. Llandaff.
Theological writer.

=Corbet, Richard.= 1562-1635. Bp. Norwich. Poet of indifferent merit.

=Cornwall, Barry=. See Procter, B. W.

=Coryat, Thomas.= 1577-1617. Writer of travels. Best known by Coryat's
Crudities, entertaining, but full of affectations.

=Costello, Dudley.= 1803-1865. Novelist. Author Stories from a Screen,
Faint Heart Never Won Fair Lady, The Millionaire, etc.

=Costello, Louisa Stuart.= 1815-1870. Novelist and writer of travels.
Sister to D. C. Author of The Queen Mother, the Rose Garden of Persia,
etc.

=Cottle, Joseph.= 1770-1853. Poet. Best known, however, by his
Reminiscences of Coleridge and Southey.

=Cotton, Charles.= 1630-1687. Poet and translator of Montaigne.

=Cotton, Nathaniel.= 1721-1788. Poet. Author Visions in Verse,
Miscellanies.

=Cotton, Sir Robert.= 1570-1631. Antiquary and historical collector.

=Coverdale, Miles.= 1487-1568. Bp. Exeter. Translator, with Tyndale,
of the Bible. The first translation of the whole Bible was by C., and
appeared in 1635.

=Cowley, Abraham.= 1618-1667. Poet and essayist. His popularity, once
great, is now slight. His verse is ingenious, but contains little
poetic feeling. His most pretentious poem is The Davideis. _See
Aikin's edition, 3 vols., 1802._

=Cowper [koo'per or kow'per], Wm.= 1731-1800. Poet. His verse is
mainly religious or didactic, but his humorous ballad of John Gilpin
is widely famous. He was the author of many beautiful and well-known
hymns, of a long poem, The Task, and the exquisite Lines on My
Mother's Picture. Style quiet and meditative. _The best edition of C.
is that by Southey, with biography, 1838._ _See Cowper, by Goldwin
Smith, in Eng. Men of Letters._

=Cox, Sir George W.= 182 Historian. Author Hist. of Greece,
Mythology of the Aryan Nations, Tales of Ancient Greece, etc. _Pub.
Apl. Har. Ho._

=Coxe, Wm.= 1744-1828. Historian. Author Hist. House of Austria, Kings
of Spain, Memoirs of Duke of Marlborough, etc. A standard writer.
_Pub. Apl._

=Crabbe, George.= 1754-1832. Poet. Writer of realistic, matter-of-fact
narrative poems: The Village, The Parish Register, etc. _See complete
edition of 1834, 8 vols., with Life._ _See Atlantic Monthly, May,
1880, "A Neglected Poet."_

=Crabbe, George.= 1778-1834. Philologist. Author of Hist. Eng. Law and
a noted work on Eng. Synonyms. _Pub. Har._

=Craig-Knox, Mrs. Isa.= 183 Scotch poet. Author Ode to Burns,
Duchess Agnes, etc. _Pub. Cas._

=Craik, Mrs. Dinah Maria Mulock.= 182 Novelist and poet. Author
of quiet, helpful, earnest stories, among which John Halifax,
Gentleman, is the most noted. Others are, A Brave Lady, A Noble Life,
A Woman's Kingdom, Mistress and Maid, etc. Philip My King and Douglas
are two of her finest poems. _Pub. Har. Hou. Mac._

=Craik, George Lillie.= 1799-1866. Historian. Author of a valuable
Hist. Eng. Lit., The English of Shakespeare, Bacon and his Philosophy,
etc. _See Rolfe's Craik's English of Shakespeare._ _Pub. Scr._

=Cranmer, Thos.= 1489-1555. Abp. Canterbury. Theologian. _See
Archdeacon Todd's Life of, 1831._

=Crashaw [cr[)a]sh'aw], Richard.= c. 1620-1650. Poet. Author of Steps
to the Temple, etc. His verse is fanciful and mystical, but always
melodious. _See Turnbull's complete edition of London, 1858._ _See G.
MacDonald's England's Antiphon and Cornhill Mag., April, 1883._

=Creasy, Sir Edward Shepherd.= 1812-1878. Historian. Author Fifteen
Decisive Battles of the World, Hist. Ottoman Turks, Hist. of England.
_Pub. Ho. Har._

=Croker, John Wilson.= 1780-1857. Essayist and historical writer.
Style caustic and vigorous. _See H. Martineau's Biographical
Sketches._

=Croker, Thos. Crofton.= 1798-1854. Irish novelist. Author of romances
and fairy tales, the latter of great beauty.

=Croly, George.= 1780-1860. Irish poet. Author Angel of the World,
Catiline, etc. His verse has a showy, tinsel brilliancy. _Pub. Har.
Rou._

=Cruden [kroo'den], Alexander.= 1701-1770. Scotch theologian. Famous
as the author of the well-known Concordance to the Bible. _Pub. Lip.
Ran. Wh._

=Cudlip, Mrs. Annie Pender=, "Annie Thomas." 18-- ----. Novelist.
Author Denis Donne, A Passion in Tatters, Playing for High Stakes,
etc. _Pub. Har._

=Cudworth, Ralph.= 1617-1688. Philosopher. His True Intellectual
System ranks among Eng. prose classics. _See edition 1845, 3 vols._

=Cumberland, Richard.= 1632-1718. Bp. Peterborough. Philosophical
writer.

=Cumberland, Richard.= 1732-1811. Great-grandson to preceding. Poet
and dramatist. Wrote The West Indian, Wheel of Fortune, and other
rather sentimental comedies. _See edition of his dramas, by Jansen,
1813._

=Cumming, John.= 1810-1881. Scotch theologian and popular London
preacher. Author Apocalyptic Sketches, Fall of Babylon Foreshadowed,
etc.

=Cunningham, Allan=. 1785-1842. Scotch poet and critic. C. wrote many
spirited songs, among which A Wet Sheet and a Flowing Sea is best
known. Author Hist. British Painters, Life of Wilkie, etc. _See Poems
and Songs of, edited by Peter Cunningham, 1847._ _Pub. Har._

=Cunningham, John.= 1729-1773. Irish lyrical poet.

=Cunningham, John Wm.= 1780-1861. Poet.

=Cunningham, Peter.= 1816-1869. Son to A. C. Antiquary. Author
Handbook of London, Modern London, Memoir of J. M. W. Turner, etc.




=Dalrymple, Sir David.= 1726-1792. Scotch historian. Author Annals of
Scotland, etc.

=Dalrymple, John Hamilton.= 1726-1810. Scotch historian. Author
Memoirs of Great Britain.

=Daniel, Samuel.= 1562-1619. Poet and historian. D. wrote a Hist. of
the Civil Wars in 8-line stanzas, also a prose Hist. of England. _See
Campbell's Specimens of Eng. Poets._

=D'Arblay, Madame,= _nee_ =Frances Burney.= 1752-1840. Novelist.
Author Evelina, Cecilia, Camilla, etc. _See her Diary, pub. 1846; also
Contemporary Rev., Dec., 1882._ _Pub. Har. Rob._

=Darwin, Chas. Robert.= 1809-1882. Naturalist. The most notable
scientist of the age, and the originator of the Evolution Theory. He
had a clear, well-balanced mind, and his statements are based on
careful observation and reflection. Origin of Species, Variation under
Domestication, Expression of Emotion in Man and Animals, Descent of
Man, Insectivorous Plants, and Movements in Plants are his chief
works. _See Atlantic Monthly, June, 1882; Century Mag., Jan., 1883._
_Pub. Apl._

=Darwin, Erasmus.= 1731-1802. Grandfather to C. D. Poet and physician.
Author of The Botanic Garden, a hard, metallic poem of a scientific
cast, polished and elaborated to excess. _See Miss Seward's Memoirs
of; Craik's Eng. Lit., vol. 2; Krause's Life of._

=Davenant, Sir Wm.= 1605-1688. Dramatist. D. wrote 25 comedies and
tragedies, and the long and feeble heroic poem Gondibert. _See Ward's
Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Davies, Sir John.= 1570-1626. Poet. Author of Nosce Teipsum, a poem
on the immortality of the soul, of great power and beauty, and a
poetical treatise on dancing, entitled Orchestra. _See Grosart's
complete edition, 1876._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=Davy, Sir Humphrey.= 1778-1829. Chemist. Author Researches Chemical
and Philosophical, Elements of Chemical Philosophy, Consolations of
Travel, etc. _See Life and Works of, by John Davy, 9 vols., London,
1840._ _Pub. Rob._

=Day, Thomas.= 1748-1789. Author of the famous juvenile tale Sandford
and Merton. _Pub. Har. Hou. Rob._

=Defoe, Daniel.= 1661-1731. Political writer and novelist. His stories
form the link connecting the tales and romances of the 17th cent. with
the novel of the 18th. Moll Flanders, Capt. Singleton, and Robinson
Crusoe are among his chief works. Style lively, rapid, and realistic.
_See Oxford edition, 20 vols., 1840._ _See Life, by Lee, 3 vols.;
also, Defoe, by Wm. Minto, in Eng. Men of Letters._

=Dekker, Thomas.= c. 1570-1641. Dramatist. Author Satiriomastix, etc.
D. wrote mainly with other dramatists, but so far as his separate work
can be traced, it shows tenderness and pathos. _See Eng. edition of
Dekker, 1873._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=De la Rame [deh-lae-rae-m[=a]'], Louisa=, "Ouida." 184 Novelist.
Author of Strathmore, Moths, Bebee, Wanda, etc. An entertaining,
sprightly writer, of much genius, whose works are of a doubtful moral
tendency. _Pub. Lip._

=De Morgan, Augustus.= 1806-1871. Mathematician. Author Essays on
Probabilities, Formal Logic, Paradoxes and Problems, etc.

=Denham, Sir John.= 1615-1668. Poet. His poem Cooper's Hill shows fine
descriptive powers. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Dennis, John.= 1657-1734. Dramatist and critic. Author of A Plot and
No Plot, Appius and Virginia, The Usefulness of the Stage, The
Grounds of Criticism, etc.

=De Quincey, Thomas.= 1785-1859. Critic and essayist. A great master
of Eng. prose. He possessed great acuteness and fine descriptive
powers, but lacked creative ability. Confessions of an Opium-Eater and
Murder Considered as one of the Fine Arts are two of the best examples
of his style. _See Page's Life of, 1877; Biographical Sketches by H.
Martineau._ _Pub. Hou._

=Derby, Earl of.= See Stanley, Edward G. S.

=De Redcliffe, Lord Stratford.= 1788-1880. Poet and theologian.

=De Vere, Sir Aubrey.= 1788-1846. Irish poet. Author Julian the
Apostate, etc.

=De Vere, Aubrey Thos.= 181 Irish poet. Son to preceding. Author
May Carols, Irish Odes, The Sisters, etc. His verse is pleasing, and
possesses merit.

=De Vere, Edward.= Earl of Oxford. 1545-1604. Poet.

=Dibdin, Charles.= 1745-1814. Poet and miscellaneous writer. Author of
a complete Hist. of the Eng. Stage, but best known by his naval songs,
over 1200 in number. _For the latter, see Hogarth's edition, 1843._

=Dibdin, Thos.= 1771-1841. Son to C. D. A prolific song-writer and
playwright. Author of a Metrical Hist. of England, etc.

=Dibdin, Thos. Frognall.= 1776-1847. Bibliographer. Neph. to C. D.
Author Bibliomania, Typographical Antiquities of Gt. Britain,
Bibliographical Decameron, etc.

=Dicey, Edward Stephen.= 183 Journalist. Author Memoir of
Cavour, Rome in 1860, The Schleswig-Holstein War, etc.

=Dick, Thomas.= 1772-1857. Scotch writer. The Christian Philosopher is
his best known work. _Pub. Har. Clx. Phi._

=Dickens, Charles.= 1812-1870. Novelist. Author of some 30 novels and
tales, all bearing marks of genius and originality. He is widely read
and admired, and his novels delight readers of all ages. His principal
faults consist in elaborating and dwelling on the grotesque and
unattractive side of humanity, and in overstraining the pathetic
portions of his novels. Pickwick Papers, Nicholas Nickleby, Tale of
Two Cities, David Copperfield, Oliver Twist, and the Christmas Carol
are among the best of his works. _See Fields's Yesterdays with
Authors, and Lives by Forster and Mackenzie._ _Pub. Apt. Est. Har.
Hou. Le. Lip. Lit. Pet. Por. Rou. Os._

=Digby, Sir Kenelm.= 1603-1665. Philosophical writer.

=Digby, Kenelm Henry.= 180 Archaeologist. Author Mores Catholici,
The Broad Stone of Honor, etc. An industrious and careful writer.

=Dilke, Chas. Wentworth.= 1789-1864. Critical writer of note.

=Dilke, Sir Chas. Wentworth.= 184 Grandson to preceding.
Traveler and political writer. Author Greater Britain, The Fall of
Prince Florestan of Monaco, etc. _Pub. Har. Lip. Mac._

=Dillon, Wentworth.= Earl of Roscommon. 1633-1684. Poet. Essay on
Translated Verse is his chief work. Style elegant and cold.

=Disraeli [diz-r[=a]'el-ee], Benj.= 1805-1881. Novelist and statesman.
Son to I. D. A talented and successful writer, possessed of great
energy and strength of will. In his novels the leading people of his
time are satirized. Vivian Gray, his first novel, and Endymion, his
last, appeared fifty-five years apart. Others are Contarini Fleming,
Henrietta Temple, Coningsby, Venetia, Tancred, and Lothair, all
brilliant and showy productions. _Pub. Apl. Har._

=Disraeli, Isaac.= 1766-1848. An industrious writer of miscellaneous
works, the best known being Curiosities of Lit., Calamities of
Authors, Quarrels of Authors, etc. _See edition of, by his son, 1850._
_Pub. Arm. Har. Rou._

=Dixon, Wm. Hepworth.= 1821-1879. Historian and biographer. Author
Personal Hist. of Lord Bacon, New America, Hist. of Two Queens, Her
Majesty's Tower, etc. _Pub. Har. Lip._

=Dobell [d[)o]-bell'], Sydney.= 1824-1874. Poet. A writer who has an
honorable place among modern minor poets. Author of The Roman, Balder,
etc. _See Stedman's Victorian Poets; Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4._ _See
complete English edition, 1875; also, Life and Letters of, London,
1879._

=Dobson, Austin.= 184 Poet and critic. Author Vignettes in
Rhyme, Proverbs in Porcelain, etc. An exceedingly graceful writer,
whose poems all show a cultivated imagination and much tenderness of
expression. Among the best are After Sedan, The Dead Letter, and The
Young Musician. Fielding, in Eng. Men of Letters, is his chief prose
work. _Pub. Ho._

=Doddridge, Philip.= 1702-1751. Moralist. Author Rise and Progress of
Religion in the Soul, Family Expositor, Hymns, etc. Style plain and
simple. _See edition of, Leeds, 1802, 10 vols.; also, Life and
Correspondence, 5 vols., London, 1831, and Life, by D. A. Harsha._

=Dodsley, Robert.= 1703-1764. Poet and publisher. Author Economy of
Human Life, etc. Best known by his Collection of Old Plays. _See
edition by W. Carew Hazlitt, 1875._

=Donne [d[)o]n], John.= 1573-1631. Poet and theologian. His
versification is rugged, and his style obscure and fantastic, but his
poems, both religious and amatory, contain much beauty of thought. His
seven Satires are vigorous efforts. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._
_See Dean Alford's 6 vol. edition, 8vo, London, 1838._ _Pub. Hou._

=Doran, John.= 1807-1878. Biographer. Author Lives of Queens of the
House of Hanover, Monarchs Retired from Business, Hist. Court Fools,
New Pictures and Old Panels, etc. _Pub. Arm._

=Dorset, 6th Earl of.= See Sackville, Geo.

=Dorset, 1st Earl of.= See Sackville, Thos. See Buckhurst, Lord.

=Douglas, Gawain.= 1474-1522. Bp. Dunkeld. Scotch poet. D. was the
first metrical translator of Virgil in Gt. Britain. _See Ward's Eng.
Poets, vol. 1._ _See complete Eng. edition by J. Small, 1874._

=Dowden, Edward.= 184 Poet and Shakespearean scholar. Author
Shakespeare's Mind and Art, Southey, in Eng. Men of Letters, Poems,
etc. _Pub. Har._

=Drayton, Michael.= 1563-1631. Poet. His chief work is the Polyolbion,
a poetical description of Britain in 100,000 lines. A far better work
is the Nymphidia, an exquisitely graceful, mock heroic fairy poem.
_See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=Drummond, William= [of Hawthornden]. 1585-1649. Scotch poet. His
Sonnets are his best production. _See Memoirs by Masson, 1863._
_Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=Dryden, John.= 1631-1700. Poet and dramatist. His verse takes a wide
range: in satire we have Absalom and Achitophel, MacFlecknoe, etc.; in
theology, Religio Laici, Hind and Panther, etc.; in drama, some thirty
plays; in translation, his Virgil; and in lyric poetry, his
magnificent Ode for St. Cecilia's Day. D. had great genius, not always
worthily employed. His dramas, when not stilted, are licentious, and
as a satirist he is bitter, personal, and coarse. _See Masson's
Essays, and Lowell's Among My Books; also, Dryden, by Saintsbury, in
Eng. Men of Letters._ _Pub. Hou. Har. Rou._

=Dugdale, Sir Wm.= 1605-1685. Antiquary. Author Antiquities of
Warwickshire, and other valuable antiquarian works.

=Dunbar, Wm.= 1465-1530. Scotch poet. D. wrote The Thistle and Rose,
The Golden Terge, etc. His witty, striking, and original genius is
closely akin to that of Burns. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=D'Urfey, Thos.= 1650-1723. Dramatist. Witty, but coarse and immoral.

=Dutt, Toru.= 1856-1877. Hindu poetess. A writer of much genius.
Ballads of Hindustan, and Sheafs Gleaned from French Fields, a vol. of
fine Eng. translations, are her chief works. _See Lit. World, June 17,
1882._

=Dyce, Alexander.= 1798-1869. Scotch Shakespearean scholar of note.
_See his edition of Shakespeare, with Glossary, 1867._

=Dyer, George.= 1755-1841. Author Hist. University of Cambridge, etc.

=Dyer, John.= 1698-1758. Welsh poet. Author Grongar Hill, The Fleece,
and Ruins of Rome. His verse is natural and unaffected. _See Ward's
Eng. Poets, vol. 3._

=Dyer, Thos. Henry.= 180 Historian. Author Hist. Modern Europe,
Ancient Athens, Hist. Kings of Rome, Hist. City of Rome, and Life of
Calvin. _Pub. Lit._




=Eadmer [[)e]d'mer].= ---- 1124. Bp. St. Andrews. Wrote a Latin Hist.
of his Own Time.

=Earle, John.= 1601-1655. Bp. Worcester. The reputed author of the
Micosmography, a remarkable vol. of studies of character.

=Eastlake, Sir Chas.= 1793-1865. Artist. Author Hist. Gothic Revival,
Materials for a Hist. Oil Painting, etc. _See Lady Eastlake's
Biography of, 1870._

=Eden [[=e]'den], Sir Fred'k Morton.= 1766-1809. Author of a valuable
Hist. of the Laboring Classes of England, etc.

=Edgeworth, Maria.= 1767-1849. Novelist. Author Rosamond, Castle
Rackrent, Belinda, Helen, etc. Style didactic, but entertaining. Her
juvenile tales are numerous and popular. _See Study of Miss Edgeworth,
by Mrs. Oliver, 1882._ _Pub. Har. Lip. Rou._

=Edwards, Amelia Blandford.= 183 Novelist and Egyptologist.
Author Barbara's History, Lord Brackenbury, etc. A writer of much
talent, whose rank among Eng. novelists is a high one. _See Lit.
World, June 4, 1881._ _Pub. Har. Por. Rou._

=Edwards, Mrs. Annie.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Susan Fielding, Ought We to
Visit Her? and Archie Lovell are among the best of her excellent
novels. _Pub. Sh._

=Edwards, Matilda Betham.= 183 Novelist. Cousin to A. B. E.
Author Doctor Jacob, Kitty, etc. Style clear and picturesque. _Pub.
Har. Lip. Rob._

=Edwards, Richard.= 1523-1566. Poet. Principal author of the famous
poetical collection of his day, The Paradise of Dainty Devices.

=Eliot, George.= See Evans, Marian.

=Ellicott, Chas. John.= 181 Bp. Gloucester and Bristol.
Theologian. Author The New Testament Commentary, Historical Lect. on
the Life of Christ, etc. _Pub. Arm. Dra. Dut._

=Elliott, Ebenezer.= 1781-1849. Poet. Known as the Corn-Law Rhymer.
His verse is earnest and ardent, and shows much feeling. _See Life of,
by Searle._ _See Eng. edition, 1876._

=Ellis, George.= 1745-1815. Antiquarian of note. Best known by his
valuable work, Specimens of Early Eng. Poets.

=Ellis, Sir Henry.= 1777-1869. Antiquarian writer.

=Ellis, Mrs. Sarah [Stickney].= 1812-1872. Author Women of England,
Daughters of England, Wives of England, Mothers of England, etc.

=Ellwood, Thos.= 1639-1713. Poet. Author of a dull poem entitled The
Davideis.

=Elphinstone [[)e]l'fin-st[o^]n], James.= 1721-1809. Scotch
grammarian.

=Elphinstone, Mountstuart.= 1779-1859. Historical writer. Author Hist.
of India, etc.

=Elyot [[)e]l'[)i]-[o^]t], Sir Thos.= c. 1495-1546. Moralist. Author
Defence of Good Women, etc.

=Emerson-Tennent, Sir James.= 1804-1869. Historical writer.

=Erskine, Thos.= 1750-1823. Jurist. _See Select Speeches, with Memoir
by Walford, 2 vols., 8vo, London, 1870._

=Etheridge, Sir George.= 1636-1694. Comic dramatist. Author of The
Comical Revenge, She Would if She Could, etc. Style sprightly and
witty. _See Living Age, Apr. 30, 1881._

=Evans, Marian=, "George Eliot." 1820-1880. Novelist and poet. A
complete list of her works comprises translations of Strauss's Life of
Jesus and Feuerbach's Essence of Christianity; the novels, Scenes of
Clerical Life, Adam Bede, Mill on the Floss, Silas Marner, Romola,
Felix Holt, Middlemarch, and Daniel Deronda; the long poems, Spanish
Gypsy, Agatha, Legend of Jubal, and How Lisa Loved the King, with a
few short ones; and a vol. of essays, entitled Impressions of
Theophrastus Such. The strength of her novels lies in their wonderful
delineations of character, their subtle analysis of motive as acted on
by circumstance, and the lofty wisdom that infuses the whole. They
awaken the best impulses of humanity, and appeal to all the finer
sympathies. Her style is strongly marked, often picturesque, and her
descriptions clear and distinct. Her poems, though containing many
beautiful passages, do not, with one or two exceptions, take a high
rank. The best one is probably the famous O May I Join the Choir
Invisible. _See George Eliot, by Mathilde Blind; Hutton's Essays;
Cent. Mag., Nov., 1881; Eclectic Mag., April, 1881; Lit. World, Feb.
24, 1883; and Galaxy Mag., June, 1869._

=Evelyn, John.= 1620-1706. Agricultural writer. Author of Sylva Terra
and a famous Diary, which accurately reflects the manners of his time.
_See Diary and Letters of, edited by John Forster, 1857._ _See London
edition, 1875._




=Faber Frederick William.= 1815-1863. Religious poet. Author of a
number of beautiful and popular Hymns. _Pub. Dut. Mur. Wh. Rou._

=Faber, George Stanley.= 1773-1854. Theologian. Author of The Sacred
Calendar of Prophecy, etc. Style clear and exact.

=Fabyan, Robert,= c. 1456-1512. Chronicler. Wrote a Concordance of
Histories, which begins with Brutus and ends with his own time.

=Fairfax, Edward.= ---- 1632. Poet. Author of a fine translation of
Tasso. _See Am. edition, 1855, 12mo._

=Falconer [fawk'ner], Wm.= 1730-1769. Scotch poet. Author of The
Shipwreck, a poem of considerable beauty, and a Marine Dict. _See
Campbell's Specimens of the Eng. Poets._ _Pub. Hou._

=Fanshawe, Sir Richard.= 1608-1666. Poet. Translator of Camoens's
Lusiad, and author of some graceful poems.

=Faraday, Michael.= 1791-1867. Chemist. Author of numerous scientific
works, The Chemistry of a Candle, Physical Forces, etc. _See Life and
Letters of, 1870, by J. Bruce Jones, Tyndall's Faraday as a
Discoverer, and Life, by J. H. Gladstone._ _Pub. Har. Rou._

=Farjeon, Benjamin Leopold.= 183 Novelist. Joshua Marvel, Grif,
Blade-o'-Grass, London's Heart, and Bells of Penraven are among his
best works. Style akin to that of Dickens. _Pub. Har._

=Farmer, Richard.= 1735-1797. Shakespearean scholar. Author Essay on
the Learning of Shakespeare.

=Farquhar [far'kwar or far'kaer], George.= 1678-1707. Irish dramatist.
A writer of brilliant, sparkling comedies, full of good feeling. The
Beaux' Stratagem and The Recruiting Officer are the best. _See his
comedies edited by Leigh Hunt._ _See Atlantic Monthly, March, 1882._

=Farrar, Frederic Wm.= 183 Theologian. Author Life of Christ,
Eternal Hope, Life and Epistles of St. Paul, Seekers after God, etc.
Of several stories by him, St. Winifred's is perhaps the best. _Pub.
Cas. Dut. Fu. Lip. Mac._

=Fawcett, Henry.= 183 Writer on Political Economy. Author Free
Trade and Protection, Pauperism--its Causes and Remedies, Manual of
Political Economy, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Fawcett, Millicent Garrett.= 184 Wife to H. F. Author Tales in
Political Economy, Political Economy for Beginners, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Feltham, Owen.= c. 1608-1677. Essayist. Author Divine and Moral
Resolves. Style pointed and sententious.

=Fenton, Elijah.= 1683-1730. Poet. Assisted Pope in translating the
Odyssey. His original verse is not unmusical.

=Ferguson, Adam.= 1724-1816. Scotch historian and philosopher. Author
Hist. of Civil Society, Hist. Progress and Termination of Roman
Empire, etc. Style clear and scholarly.

=Ferguson, James.= 1710-1776. Scotch philosophical and mathematical
writer.

=Fergusson, James.= 180 Scotch architectural writer of note.
Author Hist. of Architecture. _Pub. Lit._

=Fergusson, Robert.= 1750-1774. Scotch poet. Author of The Farmer's
Ingle, etc. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._

=Ferrar, Nicholas.= 1592-1637. Religious writer. _See Atlantic
Monthly, Aug. 1871._

=Ferrier, James.= 1808-1864. Scotch metaphysician. His Institutes of
Metaphysics is a work of much learning and acuteness.

=Ferrier, Susan Edmonstone.= 1782-1854. Scotch novelist. Aunt to J.
F. Author of Marriage, The Inheritance, and Destiny. Her works show
much humor and are piquant in style. _See Eng. edition 1841._ _See
Temple Bar, Nov., 1878, and London Lit. World, March 31, 1882._ _Pub.
Har. Rou._

=Fielding, Henry.= 1707-1754. Novelist. With Richardson he founded a
new school of fiction, distinguished by a careful study of character
and a more truthful drawing of human nature than what had preceded.
Joseph Andrews, Amelia, and Tom Jones, though stamped with the
coarseness of his age, will continue to be read for their originality,
wit, and acute reflections. _See Thackeray's Eng. Humorists, Masson's
Novelists and their Styles, and Dobson's Fielding in Eng. Men of
Letters._ _Pub. Har. Lit. Rou._

=Finlay, George.= 1800-1875. Scotch historian. Author Hist. Greece
under the Romans, Hist. Byzantine and Greek Empires, Hist. Greece
under Ottoman and Venetian Dominion, and Hist. of the Greek
Revolution. A standard authority. _Pub. Mac._

=Fisher, Edward.= 1620-1660. Welsh theologian. Author of a noted
controversial work called The Marrow of Modern Divinity.

=Fitzgerald, Edward.= 1808-1883. Translator of note. Author of
scholarly translations of Omar Khayyam, Calderon, and AEschylus.

=Fitzgerald, Percy.= 183 Novelist and litterateur. Author
Romance of the English Stage, etc.

=Fitzgerald, Wm.= 181 Bp. Killaloe. Theologian. Author Holy
Scripture, The Ultimate Rule of Faith, Life of Butler, etc.

=Flamsteed, John.= 1646-1719. Astronomical writer.

=Fletcher, Sir Andrew= [of Saltoun]. 1663-1716. Political writer. _See
Erskine's Life of, 1792._

=Fletcher, Giles.= 1588-1623. Poet. Bro. to P. F. and cousin to J. F.
Author Christ's Victory and Triumph, a long poem in 8-line stanzas.
_See Works edited by Grosart, 1876._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Fletcher, John.= 1576-1625. Dramatist. Colleague of Beaumont. Among
plays attributed solely to F. are Rule a Wife and Have a Wife,
Beggar's Bush, and the exquisite pastoral drama The Faithful
Shepherdess. He wrote, also, portions of Shakespeare's Two Noble
Kinsmen and Henry VIII., perhaps his finest effort being the famous
Wolsey Soliloquy in the latter. See Beaumont, F. _See Dyce's edition,
1843._ _See Lamb's Specimens of the Dramatic Poets, Schlegel's
Dramatic Lit., and Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Fletcher, Mrs. Maria Jane.= [Jewsbury.] 1800-1833. Poet.

=Fletcher, Phineas.= 1584-1650. Poet. Bro. to G. F. and cousin to J.
F. F. wrote a long and curious allegorical and anatomical poem, The
Purple Island. The subject, fantastically and minutely treated, is the
human body. _See Southey's Early Eng. Poets._

=Florio, John.= 1545-1625. Grammarian.

=Fonblanque [f[)o]n-bl[)a]nk'], Albany.= 1797-1872. Journalist. Author
England under Seven Administrations. _See Life and Labors of, 1874._

=Foote, Samuel.= 1721-1777. Comic dramatist. The Liar and one or two
other farces of his still keep the stage. _See Fosters Essays and Life
by Coke, 1805._

=Forbes, Alexander Penrose.= 1817-1875. Bp. Brechin. Theologian.
Author Explanation of the Thirty-Nine Articles, etc. _See Memoir,
1876._ _Pub. Dut._

=Forbes, Archibald.= 183 Scotch journalist. Author Soldiering
and Scribbling, Glimpses through the Cannon Smoke, etc. _Pub. Osg.
Rou._

=Forbes, James David.= 1809-1868. Scientist. Author Theory of
Glaciers, etc. _See Life and Letters of by John C. Shairp, 1873._

=Ford, John.= 1586-1639. Dramatist. His plays all deal with unhappy
love, but are powerful though morbid. The Broken Heart, his best work,
is a masterpiece of pathos. His style possesses great beauty. _See
Moxon's edition Old Eng. Dramatists, and Swinburne's Essays and
Studies._

=Forrester, Mrs.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Author Dolores, Diana Carew,
Mignon, etc. _Pub. Lip._

=Forster, John.= 1812-1876. Essayist and biographer. Author lives of
Dickens, Goldsmith, Landor, Swift, Statesmen of the Commonwealth of
Eng., etc. _Pub. Apl. Har. Lip._

=Fortescue, Sir John.= c. 1395-1485. Legal writer. De Laudibus Legum
Angliae.

=Foster, John.= 1770-1843. Essayist. His style has both vigor and
beauty. _Pub. Ca._

=Fothergill, Jessie.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Author The First Violin,
Kith and Kin, One of Three, etc. _Pub. Ho._

=Fox, Chas. James.= 1749-1806. Orator and historian. _See edition of
his Speeches, 6 vols., London, 1815, and Life, by Geo. O. Trevelyan._

=Fox, George.= 1624-1690. Theological writer. Founder of the Society
of Friends. _See Life, by S. M. Janney._

=Fox, John.= 1517-1587. Martyrologist. Author of the famous Book of
Martyrs. _Pub. Cas. Clx._

=Francillon, R. E.= 184 Novelist. Author Under Slieve Ban, Rare
Good Luck, Queen Cophetua, etc. _Pub. Apl. Ho._

=Francis, Sir Philip.= 1740-1818. Political writer. Supposed author of
the famous Junius Letters, a series of powerful political tracts. _See
Junius, Johnson's Cyc._ _Pub. Rou._

=Fraser, James Baillie.= 1783-1856. Novelist and traveller. Author of
The Kuzzilbash, Hist. Persia, etc. _See Chambers Cyc. Eng. Lit., vol.
2._

=Freeman, Edward Augustus.= 182 Historian. Author Hist. Norman
Conquest, Wm. Rufus and Henry First, Hist. Architecture, Unity of
Hist., etc. An eminently thorough, accurate writer, whose Norman
Conquest is one of the most important of English histories. Style
animated and scholarly. _Pub. Ho. Mac._

=Fremantle, Wm. Henry.= 183 Theologian. Author The Gospel of the
Secular Life, Bampton Lect. 1883, etc. _Pub. Scr._

=Freer, Martha Walker.= 182 Historian. Author Life of Marguerite
of Navarre, Life of Henry III. of France, etc.

=Frere [freer], John Hookham.= 1769-1846. Poet. A writer of merit in
translation and in original verse. _See Eng. edition of, 2 vols.,
London, 1872._

=Friswell, James Hain.= 1827-1878. Essayist. Author Familiar Words,
The Gentle Life, Francis Spira and other Poems, etc. _Pub. Por._

=Froude [frood], James Anthony.= 181 Historian and essayist.
Author Hist. of England, The English in Ireland, Short Studies on
Great Subjects, The Nemesis of Faith, etc. His historical portraits
are brilliant and his historical grouping dramatic, but his judgments
of men and motives are open to criticism. All his works show great
labor and research. _Pub. Har. Scr._

=Froude, Richard Hurrel.= 1803-1836. Bro. to J. A. F. Religious
writer. _See Remains of, 4 vols., London, 1838._

=Fuller, Thomas.= 1608-1661. Historian and biographer. Author Ch.
Hist., Hist. of Worthies of England, Sermons, Holy State, etc. A
quaint, humorous, original writer of great eminence in his own day and
still read with pleasure. _See Life, by Russell, 1844._ _Pub. Dut.
Mac._

=Fullerton, Lady Georgiana.= 181 Novelist. Grantley Manor,
Constance Sherwood, Too Strange Not to be True, and Lady Bird, are
some of her works. _Pub. Apl. Cath. Pi._

=Furnivall, Fred'k James.= 182 Shakespearean scholar. Editor of
the Leopold Shakespeare.

=Fyffe, Chas. Alan.= 184 Historian. Author Modern Europe, Hist.
Greece in Appleton's Hist. Primers, etc. _Pub. Apl. Ho._




=Gale, Theophilus.= 1628-1678. Theologian. Author of The Court of the
Gentiles.

=Galt, John.= 1779-1839. Scotch novelist. Author Annals of a Parish,
Ayrshire Legatees, Life Lord Byron, etc. A prolific writer who has
carefully drawn Scotch provincial and peasant life. _See
Autobiography, 1834._ _Pub. Har._

=Gardiner, Sam'l Rawson.= 182 Historian. Author of The 30 Years'
War, 1618-1648. Eng. Hist. for Students, etc. _Pub. Ho._

=Garrett, Edward.= See Mayo, Mrs. Isabella.

=Garrick, David.= 1716-1779. Dramatist. Author Lying Valet, Miss In
her Teens, etc. _See Life, by Percy Fitzgerald, 1872._

=Garth, Samuel.= 1672-1719. Poet and physician. His mock epic, The
Dispensary, is a feeble work. _See Ward's English Poets, vol. 3._

=Gascoigne, Mrs. Caroline Leigh.= 181 Novelist and poet. Author
Doctor Harold, etc.

=Gascoigne, George.= 1530-1577. Poet. The Steel Glass his chief work.
_See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=Gaskell, Mrs. Elizabeth Cleghorn.= 1810-1865. Novelist and
biographer. Author of Ruth, Sylvia's Lovers, Wives and Daughters, Mary
Barton, etc. Her books are earnest and well written; Cranford, in
fact, is almost a classic work, and her Life of Charlotte Bronte is a
much-admired biography. _See Lit. World, July 1, 1882._ _Pub. Apl.
Har._

=Gast, John.= 1715-1788. Irish historian.

=Gatty, Alfred.= 181 Author The Vicar and His Duties, Study of
In Memoriam, etc.

=Gatty, Mrs. Margaret.= 1809-1873. Wife to A. G. Author Parables from
Nature, The Fairy Godmother, Proverbs Illustrated, Aunt Judy's Tales,
etc. _Pub. Ca. Put._

=Gauden, John.= 1605-1664. Bp. Worcester. His Ik[=o]n Basilik[=e]
professed to be the work of Charles I., of whose sufferings it was an
account, and its true authorship has occasioned much controversy.

=Gay, John.= 1688-1732. Poet and dramatist. G. wrote The Beggar's
Opera, a famous musical drama, and numerous other works. _See edition
of his Poems, London, 1806._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3, and Gay's
Fables edited by Austin Dobson._ _Pub. Apl._

=Gell [j[)e]l], Sir Wm.= 1777-1836. Archaeologist. Author Topography of
Rome, etc.

=Geoffrey [j[)e]f'r[)i]] of Dunstable.= ---- 1146. Author of a miracle
play of St. Catherine [1110], usually considered the first dramatic
work in any modern language.

=Geoffrey of Monmouth.= c. 1100-1154. Bp. St. Asaph, Anglo-Saxon
Chronicler.

=Gibbon, Edward.= 1737-1794. Historian. Author of the Decline and Fall
of the Roman Empire; a masterly work, artistically conceived and
carried out, with great research and careful detail. See Milman's
edition, 1845. _See Autobiography edited by Milman, 1839._ _Pub. Har.
Por._

=Gifford, Wm.= 1757-1826. Critic and reviewer. G. wrote the Baviad and
Maeviad, two sharp literary satires, and as editor of the Quarterly
Review was author of many bitter, satirical reviews. _See Hazlitt's
Spirit of the Age._

=Gilbert, Wm.= 1540-1603. Philosophical writer. Author De Magnete.

=Gilbert, Wm.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Author De Profundis, etc.

=Gilbert, Wm. Schevenck.= 183 Dramatist and humorous poet; son
to preceding. Author of The Bab Ballads, Original Plays, and of the
librettos of Pinafore, Pirates of Penzance, The Sorcerer, Patience,
Iolanthe, etc. _See Scribner's Mag., Sept. 1879._ _Pub. Por. Rou.
Scr._

=Gilchrist, Alexander.= 1827-1861. Biographer and art writer. Author
lives of Blake and Etty.

=Gildas.= fl. c. 510. Anglo-Latin Chronicler. _See Stevenson's
edition, London, 1838._

=Gilfillan, George.= 1813-1878. Scotch miscellaneous writer. Author
Gallery of Literary Portraits, Life of Walter Scott, Bards of the
Bible, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Gilfillan, Robert.= c. 1798-1850. Scotch poet.

=Gillies, John.= 1747-1836. Scotch historian. Author Hist. Ancient
Greece, etc.

=Gilpin, John.= 1724-1804. Critic and biographer. Author Life of
Bernard Gilpin, etc.

=Giraldus, Cambrensis.= 1147-1216. Welsh historian and poet.

=Girdlestone, Chas.= 1797-1881. Religious writer. Author Concordance
to the Prayer-Book, etc.

=Gladstone, Wm. Ewart.= 180 Statesman and essayist. Author of
Juventus Mundi, Homeric Studies, The Vatican Decrees, etc. Style
polished and able. _See Sketch of, by H. W. Lucy, Short Life of, by C.
H. Jones, and Life, by Geo. Barnett Smith._ _Also Harper's Mag.,
April, 1882._ _Pub. Apl. Har. Scr._

=Gloucester [gl[)o]s-ter], Robert of.= fl. c. 1280. Rhyming
chronicler.

=Glover, Richard.= 1712-1785. Poet. Author of Leonidas, an epic,
Hosier's Ghost, etc. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._

=Godwin, Mrs. Mary Wollstonecraft.= 1759-1797. Wife to W. G. Author
Vindication of the Rights of Women, etc. Style bold and able. _See
Atlantic Monthly, Dec. 1880._

=Godwin, Wm.= 1756-1836. Philosopher and novelist. Author Caleb
Williams, St. Leon, Cloudesly, Answer to Malthus, Political Justice,
etc. _See Life, by Kegan Paul, 1876, and Leslie Stephen's Hours in a
Library._ _Pub. Har._

=Goldsmith, Oliver.= 1728-1774. Irish poet and novelist. A writer of
great delicacy and purity of sentiment, possessing a simple,
delightful style. His poems, The Deserted Village and The Traveller,
are charming pieces of description; his comedies, The Good-Natured Man
and She Stoops to Conquer, are bright and sparkling, the latter being
perennially fresh; and his novel, The Vicar of Wakefield, is an Eng.
classic. _See Lives, by Prior, Forster, W. Irving, and Goldsmith by
Wm. Black in Eng. Men of Letters._ _See Select Poems of, edited by
W.J. Rolfe._ _Pub. Clx. Har._

=Good, John Mason.= 1764-1827. Physician and miscellaneous writer.
Author Study of Medicine, The Book of Nature, Medical Technology, etc.
_Pub. Har._

=Gordon, George, Lord Byron.= 1788-1824. Childe Harold, Prisoner of
Chillon, and Don Juan are his finest poems. A writer of great power
and strong personality, whose talent was warped by license and
self-will. Don Juan, his most brilliant poem, sins deeply against
morality. Manfred, The Giaour, and Lara are striking poems. _See Lives
by Galt, Moore, E. Brydges, Lake, and Elze; also, Byron, by Nichols,
in Eng. Men of Letters, and the Real Lord Byron by J. C. Jeaffreson._
_See Quarterly Rev., July, 1868, and prefaces to respective editions
by Wm. Rossetti and A. C. Swinburne._

=Gore, Mrs. Catherine Grace.= 1799-1861. Novelist. A prolific writer
of society tales. Author of The Cabinet Minister, The Royal Favorite,
etc. _Pub. Har._

=Gosse, Edmund W.= 184 Poet and critic. Son to P. H. G. Author
of Viol and Flute, King Erik, New Poems, Grey in Eng. Men of Letters,
etc. A lyrist of much merit. _See Harper's Mag. May, 1882, "Some
London Poets."_ _Pub. Har. Ho._

=Gosse, Philip Henry.= 181 Zoologist. Author Romance of Natural
Hist., Marine Zoology, Evenings with the Microscope, etc. _Pub. Apl.
A. T. S. Lip._

=Goulbourn, Edward Meyrick.= 181 Religious writer. Author
Thoughts on Personal Religion, The Holy Catholic Ch., Pursuit of
Holiness, etc. _Pub. Apl._

=Gould, Baring.= See Baring-Gould.

=Gower, John.= 1350-1402. Poet. G. wrote the Speculum Meditantis, in
French, Vox Clamantis, in Latin, and Confessio Amantis in Eng. _See
edition, 3 vols. 8vo, London, 1857._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1;
also Rolfe's edition of Pericles._

=Graeme [gr[=a]m], John.= 1748-1772. Scotch poet.

=Graham, Ennis.= See Molesworth, Mrs.

=Grahame, James.= 1765-1811. Scotch poet. Author of The Sabbath, etc.

=Grahame, James, Marquis of Montrose.= 1612-1650. Lyric poet. Author
of the famous lyric My Dear and Only Love. _See Biographies by Napier,
1856, and Grant, 1858._

=Grahame, James.= 1790-1842. Scotch historian. Author Hist. U. S.,
etc. Style dignified and impartial.

=Granger, James.= 1716-1766. Historian. Author Biographical Hist. of
England.

=Grant, Mrs. Anne= [of Laggan]. 1755-1838. Scotch poet and
miscellaneous writer. Author Memoirs of an American Lady [1808], etc.
_See Memoirs and Correspondence of, 3 vols., 1844._ _Pub. Mu._

=Grant, James.= 180 Journalist. Author of The Bench and the Bar,
Sketches in London, etc.

=Grant, James.= 182 Scotch novelist. Author Hist. of India, and
a long list of novels which do not take a very high rank. _Pub. Cas.
Rou._

=Grattan, Thos. Colley.= 1796-1864. Irish novelist and poet. Author
Highways and Byways, Hist. of the Netherlands, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Gray, David.= 1831-1861. Scotch poet. Author of The Luggie, etc. _See
H. G. Bell's edition, 1874._ _See R. Buchanan's David Gray and Other
Essays, 1868._

=Gray, Thomas.= 1716-1771. Poet. Author of The Bard, Progress of
Poesy, Elegy in a Country Churchyard, etc. A writer of much refinement
of expression and quiet sentiment. The calm beauty of the Elegy has
made it one of the most popular of Eng. poems. _See Gray, by E. W.
Gosse, in Eng. Men of Letters, Mason's Biog., 1778, and Selected Poems
of, edited by W. J. Rolfe._

=Green, John Richard.= 1837-1883. Historian. Author Short Hist. of the
Eng. People, The Making of England, Stray Studies, Hist. of the Eng.
People, etc. A picturesque, accurate writer, with great originality
and clearness of style. _See N. Y. Nation, March 29, 1883,
Contemporary Rev., May, 1883, Journal of Education, June, 1883,
British Quarterly Rev., July, 1883, and Fortnightly Rev., May, 1883._
_Pub. Apl. Har. Mac._

=Green, Matthew.= 1696-1737. Poet. The author of a curious reflective
poem called The Spleen. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._

=Greene, Robert.= 1560-1592. Dramatist. A prolific writer of humorous
plays, but now best known by his confession entitled Greene's Groat's
Worth of Wit bought with a Million of Repentance. _See Ward's Eng.
Poets, vol. 1._

=Greenwell, Dora.= 1821-1882. Poet and miscellaneous writer. Author
Stories That Might be True, The Patience of Hope, John Woolman, Camera
Obscura, A Present Heaven, etc. _Pub. Dut._

=Greg, Wm. Rathbone.= 1812-1881. Essayist. Author of Rocks Ahead,
Enigmas of Life, Literary and Social Judgments, Creed of Christendom,
etc., works of a thoughtful, pessimistic cast. _See Macmillan's Mag.,
June, 1883._ _Pub. Ho._

=Grenville, George, Lord Nugent.= 1788-1850. Author Memorials of
Hampden, Lands Classical and Lay, etc.

=Greville, Sir Fulke, Lord Brooke.= 1554-1628. Poet and philosopher.
Author Life of Sydney, etc. _See Grosart's edition of, 1870._ _See
Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=Griffin, Gerald.= 1803-1840. Irish poet and novelist. Author of The
Collegians, etc. _See complete Eng. edition by Griffin, 1857._ _Pub.
Rou. Sad._

=Grindon, Leopold Hartley.= 181 Author Life--its Nature,
Varieties, and Phenomena, The Shakespeare Flora, etc. _Pub. Lip._

=Grosseteste [gr[=o]s-test], Robert.= c. 1175-1253. Bp. London.
Anglo-Norman poet.

=Grote, George.= 1794-1871. Historian. Best known by his Hist. of
Greece, a standard work. _See Life, by Mrs. Grote, 1873._ _Pub. Har.
Lit._

=Grove, George.= 182 Musical critic. Author Dict. of Music and
Musicians, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Guest, Lady Charlotte.= See Schreiber, Lady Charlotte.

=Gunter, Edmund.= 1581-1626. Mathematical writer. Inventor of the
terms co-sine, co-tangent, etc. The phrase "according to Gunter" arose
from his scale of measurement being the standard one.

=Gurney, Joseph John.= 1788-1847. Philanthropist. Author Notes on
Prison Discipline, and numerous religious works. _Pub. Lip._

=Guthrie [g[)u]th'r[)i]], Thomas.= 1803-1873. Scotch philanthropist.
Author Plea for Ragged Schools, Man and the Gospel, Out of Harness,
etc. _See Life, 1873._ _Pub. Ca._

=Guthrie, Wm.= 1708-1770. Scotch historian. Author Hist. of England,
Hist. of Scotland, etc. His works have been entirely superseded by
later authorities.




=Habington, Wm.= 1605-1654. Poet. An ingenious writer of love poems.
_See Eng. edition by Arber, 1870._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Hailes, Lord.= See Dalrymple, Sir D.

=Hakluyt [h[)a]k'loot], Richard.= 1553-1616. Chronicler and
geographer. Hakluyt's Voyages is an important collection of narratives
of earlier or contemporary voyages. _See edition of, 5 vols. 4to,
London, 1809-12._

=Hale, Sir Matthew.= 1609-1676. Moral and religious writer. _See Life
by Burnet in Wordsworth's Ecclesiastical Biog._

=Hales, John.= 1584-1656. Polemical writer. Styled "The Ever
Memorable." Chiefly noted for his Golden Remains. _See Life by Des
Maizeaux._

=Hales, Stephen.= 1677-1761. One of the earliest writers on vegetable
physiology.

=Hales, Wm.= 1769-1831. Irish theologian.

=Haliburton, Thos. Chandler.= 1805-1865. Nova Scotian humorist. Author
Sam Slick, etc. _Pub. Di. Har. Hou. Rou._

=Halifax, Earl of.= See Montagu, Chas.

=Halifax, Marquess.= See Saville, George.

=Hall, Mrs. Anna Maria.= 1805-1881. Wife to S. C. H. Irish novelist
and miscellaneous writer. Author Sketches of Irish Character, The
Outlaw, The Whiteboy, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Hall, Basil.= 1798-1844. Scotch writer of travels.

=Hall, Edward.= ---- 1547. Chronicler. A minute and valuable writer.

=Hall, Joseph.= 1547-1676. Bp. Norwich. Theologian and satirist.
Sometimes styled the founder of Eng. satire. A vivacious and excellent
writer. _See edition 1837. See Hannay's Satire and Satirists, and
Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=Hall, Newman,= 181 Congregationalist religious writer. Author
Come to Jesus, The Forum and the Vatican, etc. _Pub. Phi. Sh._

=Hall, Robert.= 1764-1831. Baptist religious writer. Author Sermons on
Modern Infidelity, Reflections on War, etc. Style scholarly, eloquent,
and refined. _See Works of, with Memoir, by O. Gregory, 6 vols.,
London; also, Biog. by J. W. Morris, 1846, and Life by Paxton Hood._

=Hall, Samuel Carter.= 180 Miscellaneous writer. Author The
Stately Homes of England, Book of Memories, Retrospect of a Long Life,
etc. _Pub. Apl._

=Hallam, Arthur Henry.= 1811-1833. Poet and essayist. Son to H. H. A
young writer whose loss inspired Tennyson's In Memoriam. _See Remains,
with Life, by his father, 1834; Remains in Verse and Prose, 1862. See
Life, by Dr. John Brown; also, Atlantic Monthly, Dec. 1860._

=Hallam, Henry.= 1777-1859. Historian and critic. Author Hist. Middle
Ages, Constitutional Hist. England, Lit. of Europe, etc. An impartial
writer whose works are of great value, but whose style lacks animation
and freshness. _See H. Martineau's Biographical Sketches._ _Pub. Arm.
Har. Lit._

=Halliwell-Phillips, James Orchard.= 182 Shakespearean scholar.
Editor of Shakespeare, 16 vols. folio, 1865. Author Dict. Archaic
Words, Life of Shakespeare, Last Days of Shakespeare, etc.

=Hamerton [h[)a]m'er-ton], Philip Gilbert.= 183 Art Critic.
Author Thoughts on Art, A Painter's Camp, The Unknown River, The
Intellectual Life, etc. A writer of authority in his department. Style
graceful and refined. _Pub. Mac. Rob._

=Hamilton, Mrs. Elizabeth.= 1758-1816. Scotch writer. Best known by
her Letters of a Hindoo Rajah and The Cottagers of Glenburnie. _See
Chambers' Cyc. Eng. Lit._

=Hamilton, Sir Wm.= 1788-1856. Scotch metaphysician. Author
Discussions on Philosophy, etc. His clear, dignified style is much
admired. _Pub. Apl._

=Hannay, James.= 1827-1873. Novelist and miscellaneous writer. Author
Singleton Fontenoy, Studies on Thackeray, etc. _Pub. Har. Rou._

=Hardy, Thomas.= 184 Novelist. Author Far From the Madding
Crowd, The Return of the Native, A Pair of Blue Eyes, Two on a Tower,
etc. A novelist of high rank. His character-drawing is sharp and
incisive, his studies of peasant life truthful and sympathetic, and
his descriptive passages masterly. _Pub. Ho._

=Hare, Augustus Julius Charles.= 183 Neph. to J. C. H. and A. W.
H. Author Walks in London, Walks in Rome, Days Near Rome, Memorials of
a Quiet Life, etc. _Pub. Por. Ran. Rou._

=Hare, Augustus Wm.= 1793-1834. Author Alton Sermons, etc. _Pub. Ran.
Rou._

=Hare, Francis.= 1688-1740. Bp. Chichester. Controversial writer.

=Hare, Julius Chas.= 1796-1855. Bro. to A. W. H., and with him author
of Guesses at Truth. Author Life of Sterling, Victory of Faith, etc.
_Pub. Dut. Mac._

=Harrington, James.= 1611-1677. Political philosopher. Author of The
Oceana.

=Harrington, John.= 1534-1582. Poet. _See Hannah's Courtly Poets._

=Harrington, Sir John.= 1561-1612. Poet. Son to preceding. First
English translator of Ariosto.

=Harrison, Frederic.= 183 Positivist and philosopher. Author
Order and Progress, The Meaning of History, etc., and translator of
Comte's Social Statics.

=Hartley, David.= 1705-1757. Philosopher. Observations on Man his
chief work.

=Harvey, Gabriel.= 1545-1637. Poet. One of the first to write English
hexameter.

=Harvey, Wm.= 1578-1657. Physician. Discoverer of the circulation of
the blood. _See Works of, edited by the Sydenham Society, London,
1847._

=Havergal, Frances Ridley.= 1836-1879. Author of much devotional
verse. _Pub. Dut. Ran._

=Haweis [hoys], Hugh Reginald.= 183 Religious and miscellaneous
writer. Author Thoughts for the Times, Speech in Season, Current Coin,
Arrows in the Air, Poets in the Pulpit, Unsectarian Family Prayer,
Music and Morals, Pet, or Pastimes and Penalties, Ashes to Ashes, and
My Musical Life. _Pub. Har. Ho._

=Haweis, Mrs. Mary Eliza [Joy].= 185 Wife to H. R. H. Author
Chaucer for Children, Chaucer for Schools, Chaucer's Beads, The Art of
Beauty, The Art of Dress, The Art of Decoration, and Beautiful Houses.
The illustrations and cover designs of her own and her husband's works
are by Mrs. Haweis. _Pub. Har._

=Hay, Mary Cecil.= 184 Novelist. Author of Old Myddleton's
Money, The Arundel Motto, The Squire's Legacy, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Hayley, Wm.= 1745-1820. Poet. Of mediocre ability, but once very
popular. Author Life Wm. Cowper, etc. _See Autobiography, 1823._

=Hayward, Mrs. Eliza.= 1693-1756. Author of The New Utopia, The Female
Spectator, etc. A voluminous writer of miscellaneous works of slight
merit.

=Hazlitt, Wm.= 1778-1830. Critical essayist. Author Table-Talk, Lect.
on Shakespeare, Lect. on the Eng. Poets, etc. His criticisms on art
and the drama are of high order. His style is picturesque and his
imagination rich, but his works are sometimes deficient in moderation
and judgment. _See Life of, by his grandson, 1867._ _Pub. Lip._

=Hazlitt, Wm. Carew.= 184 Grandson to W. H. Litterateur. Author
Hist. Venetian Republic, Memoirs Wm. Hazlitt, Handbook to Early Eng.
Lit. etc.

=Head, Sir Francis Bond.= 1793-1875. Miscellaneous writer. Among his
numerous works Bubbles from the Brunnen of Nassau is one of the best
known. _Pub. Har._

=Heber, Reginald.= 1783-1826. Poet. Bp. Calcutta. A talented writer,
best known by his hymns, viz.: The Missionary Hymn, Holy, Holy, Holy,
and Epiphany. _See Life, by Mrs. Heber, 1830._ _Last Days of Heber, by
Robinson, and Memoirs by Potter and Taylor._

=Hector, Mrs. Annie Alexander. "Mrs. Alexander."= 182 Irish
novelist. Author of The Wooing O't, Her Dearest Foe, The Freres, The
Admiral's Ward, Which Shall It Be, etc. Style fresh, healthful, and
pleasing. _Pub. Ho._

=Helps, Sir Arthur.= 1818-1875. Historian and essayist. Author Hist.
of the Spanish Conquest in America, Realmah, Casimir, Maremma, etc.
His style is quiet and graceful, and Friends in Council, his best
work, is strong and helpful. _Pub. Har. Rob. Rou._

=Hemans [h[)e]m'anz], Mrs. Felicia Dorothea.= 1793-1835. Poet. Without
possessing great force some of her poems have yet taken a firm hold
upon popular sympathies. Casabianca, Graves of a Household, and The
Pilgrim Fathers are examples. Her verse is graceful and sweet, but not
strong. _See Memorials of, by H. F. Chorley, 1836._ _Pub. Lip. Por.
Rou._

=Henry VIII.= 1491-1547. Author of controversial, anti-Lutheran
treatises. _See Brewer's edition of, 1862._

=Henry, Matthew.= 1662-1714. Theologian. Author of a noted Exposition
of the Bible, of which the best edition is that of London, 1869. _See
Lives by Tony and Williams._ _Pub. Ca._

=Henry, Robert.= 1718-1790. Scotch historian. His Hist. of Gt. Britain
was the first to take account of manners and the state of society from
a purely historical basis.

=Henryson, Robert.= fl. c. 1490. Scotch poet. H. wrote the beautiful
pastoral of Robin and Makyne, found in Percy's Reliques. _See Ward's
Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=Herbert, Lord Edward.= 1581-1648. Historian and theologian. His De
Veritate is a plea for Deism. Style dignified and able. _See
Autobiography, edited by W. D. Howells._ _Pub. Hou._ _See Lord Herbert
de Cherbury by Chas. de Remusat, Paris, 1874._

=Herbert, George.= 1593-1632. Religious poet. Bro. to preceding.
Author of The Temple. His verse is elevated in tone, but marred by
quaint and fantastic conceits. _See Lives, by Walton, 1670, and
Duyckinck, 1858._ _See Grosart's edition, with Memoir, 1875._

=Herbert, Wm.= 1778-1847. Poet. Author of some spirited translations
from the Norse and other tongues, and of some excellent original
poems.

=Herrick, Robert.= 1591-1674. Poet. Author of Hesperides, etc. A
skillful lyrist whose airy gracefulness will always continue to
delight. _See Grosart's complete edition of, 1877; also, Abbey's
Illustrated Selections from, 1882._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2,
and Temple Bar, May, 1883._

=Herschel, Caroline Lucretia.= 1750-1840. Astronomer. Author Catalogue
of Stars. _See Life and Correspondence of, 1876._ _Pub. Apl._

=Herschel, Sir John Frederick Wm.= 1792-1871. Astronomer. Neph. to C.
L. H. Author Study of Nat. Philosophy, Outlines of Astronomy, Physical
Geography, etc. _Pub. Apl. Har. Rou._

=Hervey, Lord John.= 1696-1743. Author Memoirs Reign of George II.
_See edition of, 1848, with Life by J. W. Croker._

=Hervey, James.= 1714-1758. Moralist. Author Meditations, etc. _Pub.
Ca._

=Heylin, Peter.= 1600-1662. Microcosmus is his most noted work.

=Heywood, Jasper.= 1535-1598. Son to J. H. Author of rhymed
translations of Seneca.

=Heywood, John.= 1506-1565. Dramatist. Writer of grotesque Interludes.

=Heywood, Thomas.= ---- 1640. Dramatist. Was a frequent colleague of
other dramatists, and a writer of much talent, with a tender, graceful
style. _See complete edition of, London, 1874, 6 vols._

=Hoadley, Benj.= 1670-1761. Bp. Winchester. Theological writer.

=Hoadley, Benj.= 1706-1757. Dramatist. Son to preceding.

=Hobbes, Thos.= 1588-1679. Philosopher. A profound thinker, whose
Leviathan, a treatise on monarchical government, is his best known
work. _See Molesworth's complete edition of, 16 vols., London, 1845._

=Hogg, James.= 1770-1835. Scotch poet. Called "The Ettrick Shepherd."
Author of The Queen's Wake, etc. Style diffuse, but graceful and
imaginative. _See Collected Works, 1869._

=Holcroft, Thomas.= 1745-1809. Dramatist. Best known by his novel The
Marriage of Figaro, and his famous comedy The Road to Ruin. _See
Memoirs, edited by Hazlitt, 1816._

=Holinshed, Raphael.= ---- c. 1580. Chronicler. From him Shakespeare
drew in part the stories of Cymbeline, Henry VI., Richard II., Richard
III., Henry IV., Henry V., Macbeth, Lear, and Henry VIII.

=Holyoake, George Jacob.= 181 Writer on social science. Author
of The Logic of Facts, Hist. of Cooperation in England, etc. _Pub.
Lip._

=Home, Henry, Lord Kames.= 1696-1782. Scotch philosopher. Author
Elements of Criticism, etc. _See Life, by A. F. Tytler._ _Pub. Por.
Sh._

=Home, John.= 1724-1808. Dramatist. H. wrote the once popular play
Douglas, which contains the famous lines, "My name is Norval," etc.
_See complete works of, with Life, by Mackenzie, 3 vols., 8vo,
Edinburgh, 1822._

=Hone, Wm.= 1779-1842. Satirist. Chiefly known by his compilations;
as, The Every-Day Book, The Table-Book, etc.

=Hood, Edwin Paxton.= 182 Biographer. Author Lives of Wordsworth
and Swedenborg, The Uses of Biography, etc. _Pub. Arm. Do. Lip._

=Hood, Thomas.= 1798-1845. Poet and humorist. A writer whose fame as a
wit has overshadowed his merits as a poet. His style, when not
professedly humorous, is tender and graceful. For moral earnestness
The Bridge of Sighs and The Song of the Shirt cannot be surpassed.
_See E. P. Sargent's edition, Pub. Apl.; also, F. J. Child's edition._
_Pub. Dut. Hon. Por. Put. Rou._

=Hood, Thomas.= 1835-1875. Miscellaneous writer. Son to preceding.
Author of The Rhymster, etc.

=Hook, Theodore Edward.= 1788-1842. A writer of novels of fashion,
inartistic in form, but full of humor. His power of extempore
verse-making was remarkable. _See Life, by Barham, 1848._ _Pub. Rou._

=Hook, Walter Farquhar.= 1798-1875. Neph. to T. E. H. Author Lives
Abps. Cant., Ecclesiastical Biog., Ch. Dict., etc. _See Life and
Letters._ _Pub. Dut._

=Hooker, Joseph Dalton.= 181 Botanist. Son to W. J. H. Author
Student's Flora British Islands, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Hooker, Richard.= 1553-1600. Theologian. Author The Laws of
Ecclesiastical Polity. The greatest prose writer of the Elizabethan
age. _See Keble's edition, 3 vols._ _Pub. Mac._

=Hooker, Sir Wm. Jackson.= 1785-1865. Botanist. Author British Ferns,
Garden Ferns, British Flora, etc. _Pub. Put._

=Hope, Alex. James Beresford.= 182 Son to T. H. Author of the
Eng. Cathedral in the 19th Cent., Worship in the Church of England,
etc.

=Hope, Thomas.= 1770-1831. Miscellaneous writer. Author Costumes of
the Ancients, Household Furniture, etc., and the famous Oriental tale
Anastasius. _Pub. Har._

=Horne, George.= 1730-1792. Bp. Norwich. Theologian. Author of a noted
Commentary on the Psalms. _Pub. Ca._

=Horne, Richard Hengist.= 180 Dramatic poet. Author Gregory
VII., Cosmo de Medici, Ballads and Romances, Orion, etc. A writer of
much power, whose circle of readers is undeservedly small. _See
Stedman's Victorian Poets._ _Pub. Rob. Rou._

=Horne, Thos. Hartwell.= 1780-1862. Theologian. Best known by his
Introduction to the Scriptures. _Pub. Ca._

=Horne-Tooke, John.= 1736-1812. Philologist. Author The Diversions of
Purley, etc. _See Memoirs, by Hamilton, 1812, Stephens, 1813, Graham,
1828, N. Y._

=Horner Francis.= 1778-1817. Writer on political economy and one of
the founders of the Edinburgh Rev. _See Memoir and Correspondence,
1843._

=Horsley, Samuel.= 1733-1806. Bp. St. Asaph. Theological and
controversial writer of note. _See Works of, 6 vols., London, 1845._

=Houghton, Lord.= See Milnes, R. M.

=Hoveden de [h[=o]v'den], Roger.= fl. c. 1200. Chronicler. _See Bohn's
Antiquarian Library._

=Howard, Henry, Earl of Surrey.= 1515-1547. His verse is mainly
lyrical, his love songs being his best; nevertheless he first
introduced blank verse into Eng. poetry. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol.
1._

=Howe, John. 1630-1705.= Theological writer. _See Life, by Rogers,
1836._ _Pub. Dra._

=Howell, James.= 1594-1666. Miscellaneous writer. _See Arber's
reprints of Instructions for Foreign Travel, etc._

=Howitt, Anna Mary.= Dau. to W. H. and M. H. See Watts, Mrs. A. M.

=Howitt, Mrs. Mary Botham.= 179 Wife to W. H. An industrious
author of numerous popular poems, mainly juvenile, of several
excellent prose tales, and of numerous translations from the Swedish,
German, and Danish, the most noted of these being the works of
Fredrika Bremer and Hans Andersen. Her work is characterized by
earnestness and sincerity of purpose. _See the Biograph, Aug. 1880._
_Pub. Alp. Har. Rob. Rou._

=Howitt, Wm.= 1796-1879. Poet and Miscellaneous Writer. A versatile
author whose Rural Life in England, Book of the Seasons, etc., have
been deservedly popular. His wife was co-author with him of many
books. _Pub. Har. Rou._

=Howson, John Saul.= 181 Dean of Chester. Theologian. Author
Life and Epistles of St. Paul [with W. J. Conybeare], Companions of
St. Paul, Metaphors of St. Paul, Miracles of Christ, etc. _Pub. Mac.
Rou._

=Hoyle [hoil], Edward.= 1672-1769. A noted writer upon Games. _Pub.
Lip. Rou._

=Hugesson.= See Knatchbull-Hugesson.

=Hughes, John.= 1677-1720. Poet and essayist. A contributor to The
Spectator.

=Hughes, Thomas.= 182 A popular writer whose School Days at
Rugby, Tom Brown at Oxford, Life of King Alfred, Manliness of Christ,
Scouring of the White Horse, etc., have been widely read. _Pub. Hou.
Mac. Por._

=Hume, David.= 1711-1766. Scottish historian and philosopher. Author
Philosophical Essays, Hist. of England, etc. His style possesses
originality and spirit, but as a historian he is inaccurate. _See Life
and Correspondence of, by T. Hill Burton, Edinburgh, 1847; also Hume,
by T. H. Huxley in Eng. Men of Letters._ _Pub. Har. Lip. Por._

=Hunt, James Henry Leigh.= 1784-1859. Poet and essayist. Francesca da
Rimini and Legend of Florence are his finest poems, but Abou-Ben-Adhem
is the best known. A writer whose happy, genial spirit expresses
itself in his prose and verse. _See Autobiography edited by his son,
1850._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4, and Century Mag. March, 1882._
_Pub. Har. Rob. Rou._

=Hunter, Mrs. Anne.= 1742-1821. Poet. Her lyrics possess much beauty,
and some of them were set to music by Haydn. "My mother bids me bind
my hair" is well known.

=Hurd, Richard.= 1720-1808. Bp. Worcester. Theologian. Author
Dialogues, Sermons, etc. _See edition 1811, 8 vols._

=Hutcheson, Francis.= 1694-1747. Irish metaphysician. Author of a
System of Moral Philosophy, etc. Founder of the Scotch Metaphysical
School.

=Hutchinson, Mrs. Lucy.= 1620-1659. Known to literature by her
admirable Memoirs of her husband first published in 1808.

=Hutton, Richard Holt.= 182 His main work in the London
Spectator. Author Essays, Theological and Literary. _Pub. Har. Mac.
Por._

=Huxley, Thomas Henry.= 182 Naturalist. Author Man's Place in
Nature, Comparative Anatomy, Protoplasm, Lay Sermons, etc. A leader in
modern thought and investigation. _Pub. Apl. Mac._

=Hyde, Edward, Earl of Clarendon.= 1608-1673. Historian. Author Hist.
of the Great Rebellion. His style is defective, but he is fully master
of his subject.




=Inchbald, Mrs. Elizabeth.= 1753-1821. Novelist and dramatist. Her
novels, A Simple Story and Nature and Art were once popular, and some
of her plays are yet acted. The best are Such Things Are, Wives as
They Were and Maids as They Are, and Lovers' Vows. _See Boaden's Life
of, 1833; also Miss Kavanagh's Eng. Women of Letters._ _Pub. Har._

=Ingelow [[)i]n'j[)e]-low], Jean.= 183 Poet and novelist. Her
novels Off the Skelligs, Don John, etc., though popular and
entertaining, are inartistic in construction. Her poetry, though
occasionally obscure, is always graceful and beautiful. Songs of
Seven, The High Tide, and Divided are among the best. _Pub. Rob. Rou._

=Ingleby, Clement Mansfield.= 182 Shakespearean scholar. Author
of Shakespeare--the Man and the Book, View of the Shakespeare
Controversy, etc.

=Inglis, Henry David.= 1795-1835. Scotch writer of travels.

=Ingulphus.= 1030?-1109. A monk to whom was long ascribed the famous
History of the Abbey of Croyland. _See Bohn's Antiquarian Library._

=Ireland, Wm. Henry.= 1777-1835. Shakespearean forger. Author of a
wretched play called Vortigern, which he asserted to be by
Shakespeare. _See Ingleby's Shakespeare, The Man and the Book, Part
2._

=Irons, Wm.= 1812-1883. Theologian. Author of The Whole Doctrine of
Final Causes, Parochial Lect., Sermons for the People, Hymns from the
Hebrew, Athanasius Contoa Mundum, etc. _Pub. Dut._

=Irving, Edward.= 1792-1834. Scotch theologian. Founder of the
Irvingite, or Catholic Apostolic Church. _See Lives by Wilkes and Mrs.
Oliphant; also Carlyle's Reminiscences._




=James I.= King of Scotland. 1394-1437. Poet. The King's Quhair is a
long love poem in 7-line stanzas, and pure and sweet in sentiment.
_See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=James V.= King of Scotland. 1511-1542. Poet. Supposed author of
Peebles to the Play and Christ's Kirk on the Green: comic and
satirical ballads.

=James VI.= of Scotland, I. of England. 1566-1625. Author of some
feeble poetry, a number of theological treatises and a famous
Counterblast Against Tobacco.

=James, George Payne Rainsford.= 1801-1860. Novelist. Author of an
immense number of novels with a strong likeness to each other.
Beginning by imitating Scott, he ended by copying himself. _Pub. Har.
Rou._

=Jameson, Mrs. Anna.= 1797-1860. An able writer who touched upon many
topics. Characteristics of Women, Sacred and Legendary Art, and Diary
of an Ennuyee, are some of her books. Her dissertations upon
Shakespeare's women are keenly appreciative. _See Memoir of, by
Geraldine Macpherson; also H. Martineau's Biographical Sketches._
_Pub. Apl. Har. Hou. Por. Rou._

=Jeaffreson, John Cordy.= 183 Novelist and biographer. Author
Live It Down, The Real Lord Byron, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Jeffrey, Lord Francis.= 1773-1850. Scotch critic and essayist. One of
the founders of the Edinburgh Review. A writer of great merit, but one
whose judgment was often warped by prejudice. _See Life by Lord
Cockburn, 1852._

=Jenkins, Edward.= 183 Political satirist. Author Ginx's Baby,
Lord Bantam, Haverholme, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Jenyns, Soame.= 1704-1787. Moralist. _See complete works of, London,
1790._

=Jephson, Robert.= 1736-1803. Dramatist. The Court of Narbonne and
Duke of Braganza were successful tragedies in their day.

=Jerdan, Wm.= 1782-1869. Journalist. _See Autobiography, 1853._

=Jerrold, Douglas Wm.= 1803-1857. Dramatist and humorist. Black-Eyed
Susan and Rent Day are his best dramas. Of his other works, A Man Made
of Money, Chronicles of Clovernook, and The Caudle Lectures are most
noted. _See Life by his son._ _Pub. Har. Hou. Rou._

=Jerrold, Wm. Blanchard.= 182 Miscellaneous writer. Son to D. W.
J. Author Imperial Paris, Napoleon III., etc.

=Jevons, Wm. Stanley.= 1835-1882. Political economist. Author The
State in Relation to Labor, Methods of Social Reform and other Essays,
Investigations in Currency and Finance, etc. _Pub. Apl. Mac._

=Jewsbury, Geraldine Endsor.= 1821-1880. Novelist and journalist.
Author of Zoe, Half Sisters, Constance Herbert, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Jewsbury, Maria Jane.= Sister to G. E. J. See Fletcher, Mrs.

=Johnson, Samuel.= 1705-1773. Dramatist. Author Hurlothrumbo, etc.

=Johnson, Samuel.= 1709-1784. Lexicographer and miscellaneous writer.
Author of London, a poetical satire, Rasselas, a didactic novel, Lives
of the Poets, Dict. of the Eng. Lang., and numerous other works. His
style is heavy and ponderous, but dignified, sonorous, and peculiarly
his own. He was the greatest literary figure in England between 1745
and 1784. _See Boswell's Life of, edited by J. W. Croker; also Johnson
by Leslie Stephen in Eng. Men of Letters._ _Pub. Har. Le. Lit. Mac._

=Johnston, Arthur.= 1587-1641. Scotch poet. Noted for a fine Latin
translation of the Psalms.

=Johnstone, Charles.= ---- 1800. Novelist. His Adventures of a Guinea
was once popular. _See W. Scott's Lives of Eminent Novelists._

=Jones, Sir Wm.= 1746-1794. Poet, Orientalist, and translator. _See
edition of 1807 with Life._

=Jonson, Ben.= 1574-1637. Dramatist. A robust, dignified writer, more
popular in his day than Shakespeare. Volpone, Silent Woman, Alchemist,
Every Man in his Humor, and Every Man out of his Humor are his best
comedies: Catiline and Sejanus his only tragedies. His pastoral drama,
The Sad Shepherd, is graceful and sweet. _See Cunningham's edition of
Johnson, 1870, and Schlegel's Dramatic Literature._ _Pub. Apl. Rou._

=Jortin, John.= 1698-1770. Ecclesiastical historian.

=Jowett, Benjamin.= 181 Greek scholar. Translator of Plato and
Thucydides. _Pub Scr._

=Junius.= See Francis, Sir Philip.




=Kames, Lord.= See Home, Henry.

=Kavanagh [kav'a-nae' or kav'a-nah'], Julia.= 1824-1877. Irish
novelist. Author Nathalie, Eng. Women of Letters, Beatrice, etc. _Pub.
Apl. Ho._

=Kaye, Sir John Wm.= 1814-1876. Military historian. Author Hist. War
in Afghanistan [1851], Hist. Sepoy War, Lives of Indian Officers,
Essays of an Optimist, etc. _Pub. Lip. Rou._

=Keary, Annie.= 1825-1879. Novelist. Author Castle Daly, A Doubting
Heart, Heroes of Asgard, Clemency Franklyn, etc. _See Memoir of, by
her Sister; also Catholic World, July, 1879._ _Pub. Har. Mac. Por._

=Keats, John.= 1795-1821. Poet. A great master of the music of verse.
The Ode on a Grecian Urn and Ode to a Nightingale are nearly perfect
poems. The Eve of St. Agnes, Isabella, Hyperion and Endymion are
longer poems, full of sensuous richness of expression and intensity of
feeling. _See Rossetti's edition of._ _See Life of, by Lord Houghton._

=Keble [k[)e]b'l], John.= 1792-1866. Religious poet. Author Christian
Year, Lyra Innocentium, etc. Versification musical and refined. _See
Shairp's Studies in Poetry and Philosophy, C. Yonge's Musings over the
Christian Year, Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4, and Memoir by J. T.
Coleridge._ _Pub. Dut._

=Keddie, Henrietta=, "Sarah Tytler." 182 Novelist. Author
Citoyenne Jacqueline, What She Came Through, and several valuable
literary and artistic handbooks. _Pub. Har. Rob. Rou._

=Keightley [k[=i]t'l[)i]], Thomas.= 1789-1872. Historian. Author Hist.
England to 1839, Outlines of Hist., Mythology of Ancient Greece, etc.
_Pub. Apl. Har. Lip._

=Kemble, Adelaide.= See Sartoris, Mrs.

=Kemble, Frances Anne.= 181 Poet and miscellaneous writer. _See
Allibone's Dict._ _Pub. Har. Ho._

=Kemble, John Mitchell.= 1807-1857. Anglo-Saxon scholar. Bro to A. K.
and F. A. K. Author of The Saxons in England, etc. A writer of
authority in his department.

=Ken, Thomas.= 1637-1711. Bp. Bath and Wells. Poet. His Morning and
Evening Hymns introduced a simpler, sincerer style of religious
poetry. _See Life, by Duyckinck._

=Kenney, Charles Lamb.= 1823-1881. Dramatist. Author lives of Balzac
and Balfe, etc. _Pub. Rou._

=Kenney, James.= 1780-1849. Dramatist. Author Raising the Wind, etc.

=King, Henry.= 1591-1669. Bp. Chichester. Religious poet.

=Kinglake, Alex. Wm.= 180 Historian. A brilliant and powerful
writer. Author Hist. Crimean War, Eothen, etc. _Pub. Arm. Har._

=Kingsley, Charles.= 1819-1875. Novelist and poet. Author of
Andromeda, the finest Eng. hexameter poem, and the stories, Alton
Locke, Yeast, Westward Ho, Hypatia, At Last, etc. Style forcible but
uneven. _See Life by Mrs. Kingsley, 1876._ _Pub. Apl. Har. Mac. Lip.
Scr._

=Kingsley, Henry.= 1830-1876. Novelist. Bro. to C. K. Author
Ravenshoe, Silcote of Silcotes, Austin Elliott, Hetty, etc. _Pub. Do.
Har. Mac. Rou._

=Kingston, Wm. H. G.= 1843-1880. Author of spirited tales of adventure
for young readers. _Pub. Arm. Cas. Lip. Rou._

=Kitchener, Wm.= 1775-1827. Physician. Author of the Cook's Oracle,
etc. _Pub. Har._

=Kitto, John.= 1804-1854. Author of the Pictorial Bible, Cyc. of
Biblical Lit., etc. _Pub. Ca. Phi._

=Knatchbull-Hugesson, Edward.= 182 Writer for children. Author
Crackers for Christmas and several vols. of fairy tales. _Pub. Apl.
Har. Rou._

=Knight, Charles.= 1791-1873. Shakespearean scholar and miscellaneous
writer. Author of a Pictorial Hist. England, etc. Editor of a
Pictorial Shakespeare, etc. _See Passages from the Life of (pub.
Put.)._ _Pub. Fu. Lip. Por._

=Knight, Richard Payne.= 1750-1824. Poet and antiquary. His verse is
worthless, but his archaeological works are much esteemed. _See
edition, 1874, N. Y._

=Knolles [n[=o]lz], Richard.= 1540-1610. Historian. His Hist. of the
Turks was much praised by Dr. Johnson and Hallam.

=Knowles, Herbert.= 1798-1817. Religious poet.

=Knowles, James Sheridan.= 1794-1862. Irish dramatist. His best
tragedies are Caius Gracchus, Virginius, and Wm. Tell. The Hunchback
is his finest comedy. While his works will not bear severe criticism,
they are popular and among the best acting of modern plays. _See
edition, 1873._

=Knowles, Richard Brinsley.= 1819?-1882. Son to J. S. K. Journalist
and historical writer. Was author of the comedy The Maiden Aunt.

=Knox, Mrs. Craig.= See Craig-Knox.

=Knox, John.= 1505-1572. Scotch theologian. Author Hist. Reformation
in Scotland, and First Blast Against the Monstrous Regiment of Women.
_See Lives by Smeaton, 1572; McCrie, 1812; Niemeyer, 1824; Laing,
1847, and Brandes, 1863._ _See Fraser's Mag. April, 1875; also
Lorimer's John Knox and the Church of England._

=Knox, Vicesimus.= 1752-1821. Essayist. Author Winter Evenings, Family
Lect., etc.

=Knox, Wm.= 1789-1825. Scotch poet. Best remembered for his poem "O
why should the spirit of mortal be proud!" _Pub. Le._

=Kyd, Thomas.= fl. c. 1590. Dramatist. Author Hieronimo, The Spanish
Tragedy, etc. _See Lamb's Dramatic Poets._

=Kynaston, Francis.= 1587-1642. Poet.




=Laffan, May.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Author Hogan, M. P., Flitters,
Tatters and the Counsellor, Christy Carew, and The Honorable Miss
Ferrard. _Pub. Ho. Mac._

=Lang, David.= 1793-1878. Librarian and bibliographer. A literary
student of great diligence, and editor and author of some two hundred
and fifty works.

=Laing, Malcolm.= 1762-1818. Scotch historian. Author Hist. of
Scotland, etc. Style independent and truthful.

=Laing, Samuel.= 1780-1868. Traveler. Author Norway, Tour in Sweden,
etc., and translator of the Heimskringla, or Chronicle of the Kings of
Norway.

=Lamb, Caroline, Lady.= 1785-1828. Novelist. Author Glenarvon, Graham
Hamilton, etc.

=Lamb, Charles.= 1775-1834. Essayist. A humorist who is unsurpassed
for gentleness and purity of style. Essays of Elia, Rosamond Gray, a
tale, John Woodvil, a drama; and Specimens of Old Eng. Dramatists are
his chief works. Among the Essays Dream-Children is the most nearly
perfect. _See Lives by Talfourd, Fitzgerald, and Procter._ _See
Centenary edition of, 1875._ _Pub. Arm. Clx. Har. Lip. Rou._

=Lamb, Mary Anne.= 1765-1847. Sister to C. L. and co-author with him
of Tales from Shakespeare, Poetry for Children, etc. _See W. Carew
Hazlitt's edition of Poems, Letters, etc. of Chas. and Mary_ _Lamb,
1874; and Mary Lamb, by Anne Gilchrist, in Famous Women._

=Landon, Letitia Elizabeth= [Mrs. Maclean], 1802-1838. Poet and
novelist. Her verse is melodious and delicate, but is lacking in
force. _See Poems of, edited by W. B. Scott, 1873._ _See Life by L.
Blanchard, 1841, and Living Age, Jan. 6, 1883._ _Pub. Apl._

=Landor, Walter Savage.= 1775-1864. Poet and prose writer. Author
Gebir, Heroic Idyls, Hellenics, etc., and of numerous prose works, of
which the Imaginary Conversations is the chief. A strong, original
writer, self asserting and unrestrained. _See Forster's Life of,
Stedman's Victorian Poets, Atlantic Monthly, April, May, and June,
1864, and Feb. 1883, H. Martineau's Biographical Sketches, and Landor,
by Colvin, in Eng. Men of Letters._ _Pub. Lip. Rob._

=Lane, Edward Wm.= 1801-1876. Orientalist. Author Modern Egyptians,
Arabic Lexicon, etc., and translator of the Arabian Nights. _Pub.
Lit._

=Lang, Andrew.= 184 Poet. Author Ballads in Blue China, Helen of
Troy, etc. _See Harper's Mag. May, 1882, "Some London Poets."_ _Pub.
Mac._

=Langhorne, John.= 1735-1779. Poet and translator of Plutarch.

=Langland, Wm.= c. 1322-c. 1400. Poet. Author Vision of Piers Plowman,
an allegorical, satirical poem, aimed at the corruptions of the
church. _See edition by Wright, 1856; also Skeat's edition._ _See
Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._ _Pub. Mac._

=Lardner, Dionysius.= 1793-1859. Scientific writer.

=Lardner, Nathaniel.= 1684-1768. Theological writer. _See Collected
Works, with Memoir by Kippis, 1788._

=Latham, Rob't Gordon.= 181 Ethnologist. Author Man and His
Migrations, etc.

=Latimer, Hugh.= c. 1491-1555. Bp. Worcester. Theologian. His Sermons
are rude but forcible and strongly idiomatic discourses. _See Corrie's
edition. London, 4 vols. 8vo, 1845._ _See Life, by Demaus, 1869; and
Tulloch's Leaders of the Reformation._

=Law, Wm.= 1686-1761. Theologian. Author Serious Call to a Higher
Life, etc. _See Life, by Tighe, 1813._

=Lawrence, Geo. Alfred.= 1827-1876. Novelist. Author Guy Livingstone,
Sword and Gown, Sans Merci, Anteros, Maurice Dering, etc. _Pub. Har.
Lip._

=Layamon.= fl. c. 1200. Author The Brut, or Chronicle of Britain, a
famous semi-Saxon poem. Style earnest and simple. _See F. Madden's
edition, 1847._

=Layard [l[=a]-ard], Austen Henry.= 181 Archaeologist. Author
Nineveh and its Remains, Monuments of Nineveh, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Lear, Edward.= 18-- ----. Author Journal of a Landscape Painter,
Nonsense Book, etc. _Pub. Rob._

=Lecky, Wm. Edw. Hartpole.= 183 Irish historian. Author Hist.
Rationalism, Hist. European Morals, Hist. England in the 18th Cent.
etc. A careful, dignified writer who treats of history philosophically.
_Pub. Apl._

=Lee, Frederick George.= 183 Theologian and poet. Author of
Historical Sketches of the Reformation, Lyrics of Life and Light, etc.
_See The Biograph, Aug. 1880._ _Pub. Dut._

=Lee, Harriet.= 1766-1851. Author [with Sophia L.] of the Canterbury
Tales, a series of tales of much power. Byron's Werner is a version of
one of them.

=Lee, Holme.= See Parr, Harriet.

=Lee, Nathaniel.= 1655-1692. Dramatist. Alexander the Great is one of
his tragedies.

=Lee, Sophia.= 1750-1824. Novelist. Sister to H. L. Author of two of
the Canterbury Tales, of several novels, and of the comedy The Chapter
of Accidents.

=Lee, Wm.= 1815-1883. Irish theologian and ecclesiologist. His chief
work is the Donnellan Lect. on the Inspiration of Scripture. A
profound biblical scholar. _Pub. Ca._

=LeFanu, J. Sheridan.= ---- 1874. Novelist. Author All in the Dark,
Tenants of Malory, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Leighton [l[=a]-ton], Rob't.= 1613-1684. Abp. Glasgow. Theologian.
His style is still much admired. _See Pearson's edition, London, 1828,
N. Y. 1859._ _Pub. Ca._

=L. E. L.= See Landon.

=Leland, John.= 1506-1552. Antiquarian. Author The Itinerary, etc.

=Lemon, Mark.= 1809-1870. Journalist, novelist, and dramatist. The
Serious Family is his best known farce. Author Jest Book, etc. _Pub.
Mac._

=Lempriere [l[)e]m'pr[)i]-er, or lem-preer'], John.= 1765-1824.
Scholar of note. Author of a Classical Dict., and a Universal
Biography. _Pub. Lip. Put. Rou._

=Lennox, Mrs. Charlotte.= 1720-1804. Novelist. Author Harriet Stuart
and The Female Quixote.

=Lesley, John.= 1527-1596. Bp. Ross. Scotch historian. _See Thomson's
Edition, 1830._

=Leslie, Chas.= 1650-1722. Irish theologian. Leslie wrote A Short and
Easy Method with the Deists, a controversial work once noted.

=Leslie, Chas. Rob't.= 1794-1859. Artist. Author Handbook for Young
Painters, Memoirs Sir John Constable, Life and Times Sir Joshua
Reynolds, etc. _See Autobiographical Recollection of, edited by Tom
Taylor, 1860._

=L'Estrange [l[)e]s-tr[=a]nj], Sir Roger.= 1616-1704. Political writer
and translator.

=Lever [l[=e]'ver], Chas. James.= 1806-1872. Irish novelist. Author
Harry Lorrequer, Charles O'Malley, etc., rollicking tales not greatly
approved by the present taste. His later novels, like That Boy at
Norcott's, etc., are soberer in tone. _Pub. Har._

=Lewes [l[=u]-is], Geo. Henry.= 1817-1878. Philosopher and critic.
Author Problems of Life and Mind, Life of Goethe, Hist. of Philosophy,
etc. _Pub. Apl. Ho. Hou._

=Lewes, Mrs. G. H.= See Evans, Marian.

=Lewis, Sir Geo. Cornwall.= 1806-1863. Political and historical
writer. _See Letters of, 1870._

=Lewis, Matthew Gregory.= 1775-1818. Novelist. Famous as the author of
The Monk, a fantastic, demoniac tale. _See Life and Correspondence,
1839._

=Leyden [li'den], John.= 1775-1811. Scotch poet and Orientalist. _See
edition of his poems, 1858._

=Liddell [l[)i]d'del], Mrs. Catharine Christina Fraser-Tytler.=
184 Poet and novelist. Author Mistress Judith, Jonathan, Songs
in Minor Keys, etc. _Pub. Ho. Mac._

=Liddell, Mrs. Edward.= See Liddell, Mrs. C.

=Liddell, Henry George.= 181 Classical scholar. Author of a
Hist. of Rome, and co-author with Scott of the noted Greek lexicon
known as Liddell-and-Scott's. _Pub. Har._

=Liddon, Henry, Parry.= 183 Theologian. Author Bampton Lect.
1867, University Sermons, Sermons to the People, etc. A leader of
High Church thought. _Pub. Dut._

=Lightfoot, Joseph Barber.= 182 Bp. Durham. Biblical
commentator. _Pub. Mac._

=Lillo, George.= 1693-1739. Dramatist. Author George Barnwell, Fatal
Curiosity, and Arden of Feversham. A master of dramatic situations.

=Lindsay, Sir David.= 1490-1557. Scotch poet. _See Chalmers' edition
with Life, 1806._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=Lingard, John.= 1771-1859. Historian. Author Hist. England,
Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon Ch., etc. His history has a high rank
and is valued as a fair statement of facts from a Roman Catholic
standpoint. _Pub. Est._

=Linton, Mrs. Eliza Lynn.= 182 Novelist. Wife to W. J. L. Author
Lizzie Lorton, Sowing the Wind, etc. _Pub. Har. Lip. Rou._

=Linton, Wm. James.= 181 Poet and Engraver. Author Claribel,
Hist. Wood Engraving, Life Thos. Paine, etc. _See Stedman's Victorian
Poets._ _Pub. Est. Le._

=Livingstone, David.= 1817-1873. African explorer. Author Expedition
to the Zambesi, Last Journals, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Lloyd, Chas.= ---- 1839. Poet. Co-author with Chas. Lamb.

=Lloyd, Robert.= 1733-1764. Poet. _See Collected Works with Life, by
Kenrick, 1774._

=Locke, John.= 1632-1704. Philosopher. Author of the famous Essay on
the Understanding, a work of great penetration and power. _See Life by
Fox-Bourne, and Locke, by T. Fowler in Eng. Men of Letters._ _Pub.
Apl._

=Locker, Frederick.= 182 Poet. Author London Lyrics, etc. Style
airy and graceful. _See Century Mag. Feb. 1883._

=Lockhart, John Gibson.= 1794-1854. Scotch critic and biographer. A
writer of much talent and for 27 years editor of the Quarterly Rev.:
author Lives of Nelson, Scott, Burns, Napoleon, etc. _See H.
Martineau's Biographical Sketches._ _Pub. Har. Ho. Hou._

=Lockyer, Joseph Norman.= 183 Astronomer. Author Contributions
to Solar Physics, etc. _Pub. Apl. Mac._

=Lodge, Edmund.= 1756-1839. Historian. Author Illustrations of British
Hist., Portraits of Illustrious Persons of Gt. Britain, etc.

=Lodge, Thomas.= c. 1555-1625. Dramatist and Poet. To his novel
Roslynde; Euphues Golden Legacy, Shakespeare owes the plot and
incidents of As You Like It. _See As You Like It, Rolfe's edition, and
Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. I._

=Logan, John.= 1748-1788. Scotch poet. His verse is fresh and simple,
and his Song to the Cuckoo has great beauty. _See edition 1805, with
Life._

=Long, George.= 1800-1879. Classical scholar. Author Roman Law,
Decline and Fall of the Roman Republic, etc.

=Loudon, Mrs. Jane.= 1800-1858. Wife to J. C. L. Author of The Mummy,
a tale, and several horticultural works. _Pub. Rou. Wil._

=Loudon, John Claudius.= 1783-1843. Scotch horticulturist. His
Arboretum Britannicum is his chief work.

=Lovelace, Sir Richard.= 1618-1658. Poet. His verse is principally
amatory, and some of his songs are perfect of their kind. To Althea
and To Lucasta are the most famous. _See Carew Hazlitt's edition of
1864, and Ward's English Poets, vol. 2._

=Lover, Samuel.= 1797-1868. Irish dramatist, novelist, and poet. Rory
O'More and Handy Andy are his best known novels. His most famous song
is Rory O'More. _See Life by Bayle Bernard, 1874, and Samuel Lover, by
A. J. Symington._ _Pub. Por. Rou._

=Lower, Mark Antony.= 1813-1876. Author Eng. Surnames, Curiosities of
Heraldry, Patronymica Britannica, etc.

=Lowndes, Wm. Thos.= ---- 1843. Bibliographer. Author British
Librarian and The Bibliographer's Manual.

=Lowth [louth], Rob't.= 1710-1787. Bp. London. Son to W. L. A
classical and theological writer of great learning. _See Life, by
Peter Hall, 1834._

=Lowth, Wm.= 1661-1732. Theologian of note.

=Lubbock, Sir John.= 183 Naturalist. Author Origin of
Civilization, Pre-Historic Times, British Wild Flowers, etc. _Pub.
Apl. Mac._

=Lydgate, John.= 1370-1450. Poet. An exceedingly diffuse rhymer. _See
minor works of pub. by the Percy Soc. 1842, and Ward's Eng. Poets,
vol. I._

=Lyell, Sir Chas.= 1797-1875. Geologist. Author Elements of Geology,
Travels in N. America, Antiquity of Man, etc. _Pub. Apl. Har. Lip._

=Lyly or Lily, John.= 1553-1598. Dramatic poet. His dramas are
forgotten, but his prose romance, Euphues and his England, is
remembered for the great influence it had upon the speech of the time.
L. was a reformer, though pedantic and fantastic. Euphuism has been
ridiculed by Sydney, Jonson, Shakespeare, and Walter Scott. _See
Collins's Hist. Dramatic Poetry, Lamb's Specimens Early Eng. Poets,
and Chas. Kingsley's Westward Ho._

=Lyndsay.= See Lindsay, David.

=Lyte, Henry Francis.= 1793-1847. Poet. His hymn, Abide with Me, is
widely known. _Pub. Le. Ran._

=Lyttleton, George, Lord.= 1709-1773. Author Dialogues of the Dead,
Hist. Henry II., etc. _See Life, by Phillimore, 1845._

=Lytton.= See Bulwer-Lytton.




=Macaulay, Mrs. Catherine.= 1733-1791. Historian. Author Hist. of
England during the Stuart dynasty, etc.

=Macaulay, Thos. Babington, Lord.= 1800-1859. Poet, essayist, and
historian. A brilliant but partisan writer. The impetuous rush and
vigor of his Lays of Ancient Rome obscure their poetical defects. His
essays are numerous and cover a wide range. His Hist. of England is a
superb piece of writing but it lacks the calm impartiality that a
history should possess. _See Lines by Milman, F. Arnold and G. O.
Trevelyan; Macaulay, by J. C. Morrison in Eng. Men of Letters; and H.
Martineau's Biographical Sketches._ _Pub. Apl. Arm. Clx. Har. Hou.
Lip. Lit. Por. Rou._

=MacDonald, George.= 182 Scotch novelist and poet. His work is
all of an earnest, religious cast, but marred sometimes by mannerisms
and vagueness of touch. Robert Falconer, Alec Forbes, and St. George
and St. Michael are the best of his numerous novels. Phantastes
contains some of his best poetry. _See Lit. World, May 19, 1883._
_Pub. Apl. Do. Har. Lip. Mac. Rob. Rou. Scr._

=Mackarness, Mrs. Henry.= 1826-1881. Author of the tale A Trap to
Catch a Sunbeam, etc. _Pub. Rou._

=Mackay, Chas.= 181 Scotch poet and miscellaneous writer. Author
Town Lyrics, etc. _See Poems of, edition 1876._ _Pub. Rou._

=Mackay, Wm.= 1803-1882. Philosopher. Author Progress of the
Intellect, Eternal Gospel, etc.

=Mackenzie, Sir George.= 1636-1691. Scotch miscellaneous writer. A
voluminous author of much eminence in his day.

=Mackenzie, Henry.= Scotch novelist and essayist. Author the famous
novel, The Man of Feeling, etc. _See collected works, 1808._ _Pub.
Har._

=Mackintosh, Sir James.= 1765-1832. Ethical and historical writer.
_See Memoirs by his son._ _Pub. Har._

=Macklin, Chas.= 1690-1797. Irish dramatist. Author of the bright
comedy, The Man of the World. M. appeared on the stage as an actor
till nearly 100. _See Memoirs of, 1804._

=Macleod [m[)a]k-lowd'], Norman.= 1812-1872. Scotch miscellaneous
writer. Author of The Starling, Reminiscences of a Highland Parish,
etc. _See Life by his brother, and Memoir by Alex. Strahan._ _Pub. Do.
Lip. Rou._

=Macneil, Hector.= 1746-1818. Scotch poet. Author Will and Jean, etc.

=Macpherson, James.= 1738-1796. Scotch poet. Supposed author of a
series of poems purporting to be by Ossian, an ancient Gaelic bard.
These forgeries were immensely popular in spite of their wild and
over-strained diction. M. never revealed the secret of their
authorship. _See H. Morley's Shorter Eng. Poems._

=Macquoid, Mrs. Katherine S.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Author Patty, Beside
the River, Too Soon, etc., and several vols. of travel, Through
Normandy, Through Brittany, etc. _Pub. Apl. Har. Lip. Mac. Ran. Rou._

=Madden, Richard Robert.= 179 Poet and miscellaneous writer.
Author The Infirmities of Genius, etc.

=Magee, Wm.= 1765-1831. Abp. Dublin. Theologian. His best known work
is the Discourses on the Atonement. _See complete works, 1842._

=Magee, Wm. Connor.= 182 Bp. Peterborough. Grandson to Wm. M.
Religious writer. Author Sermons, Lectures, etc. Style eloquent and
forcible.

=Maginn, Wm.= 1793-1842. Irish humorist. Style learned, witty, and
brilliant. _See Works, edited by R. S. Mackenzie, 5 vols., N. Y.
1857._ _Pub. Wid._

=Mahaffey, John Peytland.= 183 Author Hist. Classical Greek
Lit., Old Greek Life, Rambles and Studies in Greece, Greek Social
Life, Old Greek Education, etc. _Pub. Apl. Har. Mac._

=Mahoney, Francis=, "Father Prout." 1805-1866. Irish poet and
journalist. M. wrote the noted poem, The Bells of Shandon.

=Maine, Sir Henry James Sumner.= 182 Jurist. Author Roman Law,
Ancient Law, Village Communities, Early Hist. of Institutions, etc.
_Pub. Ho._

=Maitland, Edward.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Author The Higher Law, The
Pilgrim and the Shrine, and By-and-By. _Pub. Put._

=Maitland, Sir Richard.= 1496-1586. Scotch poet.

=Malcolm, Sir John.= 1769-1833. Diplomatist. Author Hist. of Persia,
Political Hist. India, Life of Lord Clive, etc. _See Kaye's Life of,
London, 1856._

=Mallet, David.= 1700-1765. Scotch poet. Author Ballads, etc.

=Mallock, Wm. Hurrel.= 184 Novelist. Author Is Life Worth
Living, The New Republic, Positivism on an Island, Romance of the 19th
Cent., etc. A writer of much force and originality.

=Malmesbury, Wm. of.= 1095?-1143. Anglo-Norman historian.

=Malone, Edmund.= 1741-1812. Shakespearean scholar. Editor of the
edition of 1790. _See Life, by Prior, 1860._

=Malory, Sir Thomas.= 1430?-1496. Author or translator of the famous
romance, The Morte d'Arthur. _Pub. Mac._

=Malthus, Thos. Robt.= 1766-1834. Political economist. Author of a
celebrated Essay on the Principle of Population. _See Life, by Otter,
1836._

=Mandeville, Bernard.= 1670-1733. Philosopher. Author of the noted
Fable of the Bees, or Private Vices Public Benefits, etc. _See Craik's
Eng. Lit. vol. 2._

=Mandeville, Sir John.= 1300-1372. "The first writer in formed
English." He traveled extensively and wrote an entertaining account of
his travels.

=Manley, Mrs. Mary de la Riviere.= 1672-1724. Novelist and dramatist.
She wrote the noted political satire, The New Atlantis.

=Manners, John Lord.= 181 Poet. Author England's Trust, English
Ballads, etc.

=Manning, Anne.= 180 Novelist. Author Mary Powell, Household of
Sir Thos. More, Passages in the Life of the Faire Gospeller, etc.
_Pub. Do._

=Manning, Henry Edw., Cardinal.= 180 Theologian. Author Temporal
Power of the Pope, Parochial Sermons, The Vatican Decrees, etc. _See
Century Mag. May, 1883._ _Pub. Apl. Sad._

=Mannyng, Robert.= fl. c. 1340. Rhyming chronicler.

=Mansel, Henry Longueville.= 1820-1871. Philosopher. Author The Limits
of Religious Thought, Philosophy of Consciousness, Bampton Lect.,
1858, etc. _Pub. Apl. Mac._

=Mant, Richard.= 1776-1848. Bp. Killaloe. Religious writer. Author
Poems, Hist. Ch. of Ireland, etc.

=Mantell, Gideon Algernon.= 1790-1852. Geological writer of note.
Author Thoughts on a Pebble, Medals of Creation, etc.

=Map=, or =Mapes, Walter=. 1150-1196. Anglo-Norman poet and romancer.

=Marlowe, Christopher.= 1564-1593. Dramatist and poet. The greatest
dramatist before Shakespeare. His Tamburlaine was the first blank
verse play acted. Faustus, Jew of Malta, and Edward II. are powerful
dramas. The influence of Marlowe is traceable in several of
Shakespeare's plays. _See editions by Cunningham and Dyce._ _See
Schlegel's Dramatic Lit._ _Pub. Mac. Rou._

=Marryatt, Frederick.= 1792-1849. Marine novelist. Peter Simple, Jacob
Faithful, and Midshipman Easy are among the best of his novels. They
are lively, inartistic tales, full of broad fun and drollery. _See
Life, by his daughter Florence, 1872._ _Pub. Apl. Har. Lip. Rob._

=Marryatt, Florence.= See Ross-Church, Mrs.

=Marsh, Mrs. Anne Caldwell.= ---- 1874. Novelist. Author Ravenscliffe,
Emilia Wyndham, Lettice Arnold, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Marsh, Herbert.= 1757-1839. Bp. Peterborough. A profound writer on
politics and divinity. Author of a noted Hist. of the Politics of Gt.
Britain and France.

=Marston, John.= 1575-1634. Dramatist and satirist. _See Halliwell's
edition, 3 vols., London, 1856._

=Marston, Philip Bourke.= 185 Poet. Son to W. M. Author
Song-Tide, All in All, etc., and of numerous sketches and tales. His
verse is strongly subjective in tone. _See Stedman's Victorian Poets._

=Marston, Westland.= 182 Dramatist and poet. The Patrician's
Daughter is one of his best plays.

=Martin, Theodore.= 181 Translator and biographer. Author of
Life of the Prince Consort, etc., and with W. E. Aytoun of the Bon
Gualtier Ballads. _See The Biograph, Jan. 1879._ _Pub. Apl. Por._

=Martineau, Harriet.= 1802-1876. Miscellaneous writer. Her
illustrations of political economy are in the form of fiction.
Deerbrook and The Hour and the Man are her most noted romances. Style
strong, clear, and original. _See Autobiography, 1876._ _Pub. Har. Ho.
Mac. Por. Rob. Rou._

=Martineau, James.= 180 Theologian. Bro. to H. M. A leader of
Unitarian thought. Author Studies of Christianity, Hymns of Praise and
Prayer, Religious and Modern Materialism, Endeavors after a Christian
Life, etc. _Pub. Ho. Put. Rob. A. U. A._

=Marvell, Andrew.= 1620-1678. Poet and controversialist. As the former
he ranks among the first of the minor poets of his time. His fancy is
delicate and quaint. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._ _Pub. Har._

=Marzials, Theophile.= 185 Poet and musician. Author of The
Gallery of Pigeons, etc. Of his songs Twickenham Ferry is one of the
best known. _See The Biograph, March, 1880._

=Mason, Wm.= 1725-1797. Poet. His verse is wordy and feeble.

=Massey, Gerald.= 182 Poet. Author Babe Christabel, Craigcrook
Castle, etc. His verse has more sweetness than strength. _See
Stedman's Victorian Poets._

=Massinger [m[)a]s's[)i]n-j[)e]r], Philip.= 1584-1640. A writer of
much power whose style is clear and flexible. The Virgin Martyr, Fatal
Dowry, City Madam, and A New Way to Pay Old Debts, are his finest
plays. The latter is often acted. _See Works of, edited by Gifford, 4.
vols._

=Masson, David.= 182 Scotch biographer and critic. Author
British Novelists, Biographical and Critical Essays, Recent British
Philosophy, etc. His chief work is a Life of Milton, a book of great
merit and ability. _See The Biograph, vol. 3._ _Pub. Mac. Apl._

=Mathers, Helen.= See Reeves, Mrs.

=Mathias, Thos. James.= 1776-1835. Supposed author of the poem The
Pursuits of Literature.

=Maturin [m[)a]t-yoo'r[)i]n], Chas. Robert.= 1782-1824. Irish
novelist. Author Melmoth, an extravagant romance, and the tragedy of
Bertram.

=Maurice [maw'r[)i]ss], John Frederic Denison.= 1805-1872. Theologian
and ethical writer. A prominent Broad Church clergyman, writing much
and well upon theology, philosophy, and other subjects. A Hist. Moral
and Metaphysical Philosophy is his chief work. Others are Theological
Essays, The Bible and Science, and the Friendship of Books. _Pub. Le.
Mac._

=Maxwell, James Clerk.= 183 Scientific writer of note. _Pub.
Apl. Mac._

=Maxwell, Mrs. Mary E. [Braddon].= 183 Novelist. A writer of
sensational tales, among which Aurora Floyd is the most famous. Her
latest novels show a greatly improved style. _Pub. Har._

=Maxwell, Wm. Hamilton.= 1794-1850. Irish novelist. His fiction is
military in character. _Pub. Rou._

=Maxwell, Sir Wm. Stirling.= 1818-1878. Author The Cloister Life of
Chas. V., Velasquez and his Works, etc.

=May, Sir Thos. Erskine.= 181 Historian. Author Constitutional
Hist. England, Hist. Democracy in Europe, etc. Style careful and
thoughtful. _See Lit. World, April, 1878, and The Biograph, March,
1880._ _Pub. Arm. Wid._

=Mayhew, Augustus.= 1812-1875. Litterateur.

=Mayhew, Edward.= 181 Veterinary writer. Bro. to A. M. Author
Illustrated Horse Doctor, etc. _Pub. Apl. Lip. Rou._

=Mayhew, Henry.= 1812-1876. Bro. to two preceding. Author London Labor
and London Poor, German Life and Manners and numerous humorous works.
_Pub. Har. Rou._

=Mayhew, Horace.= 1819-1872. Humorist. Bro. to three preceding. Author
Letters Left at the Pastry Cook's, etc.

=Mayhew, Thomas.= 181 Bro. to four preceding. Editor of the
Penny National Library.

=Mayne, John.= 1761-1836. Scotch poet. Author of The Siller Gun, Logan
Braes, etc.

=Mayo, Mrs. Isabella Fyvie=, "Edward Garrett." 184 Religious
novelist. Author By Still Waters, Occupations of a Retired Life, Gold
and Dross, etc. _Pub. Do._

=McCarthy, Denis Florence.= 1820-1880. Poet and miscellaneous writer.
Author Ballads, Poems, and other Lyrics, etc., and translator of the
dramas of Calderon.

=McCarthy, Justin.= 183 Novelist and historian. Author Linley
Rochford, Dear Lady Disdain, etc., and of a valuable Hist. of Our Own
Times. Style graphic and forcible. _Pub. Har._

=McCulloch, John Ramsay.= 1789-1864. Political economist. Author
Principles of Political Economy, Dict. of Commerce, Statistical
Account of the British Empire, etc.

=Melmoth, Wm.= 1710-1799. Translator of Pliny. Author Laelius, or
Friendship, etc.

=Melville, Sir James.= 1535-1606. Scotch writer. Author Historical
Memoirs.

=Melville, J. G. Whyte.= 1821-1878. Novelist. Author Kate Coventry,
The White Rose, Katerfelto, etc. Style rapid and spirited. _Pub. Apl.
Por._

=Meredith, Owen.= See Bulwer-Lytton, E. R.

=Merivale, Chas.= 1808-1874. Historian. Author Hist. Latin
Christianity, Fall of the Roman Republic, Hist. of the Romans under
the Empire, etc. A writer of much ease and dignity of style, whose
historical estimates are careful and valuable. _Pub. Apl. Har. Rou._

=Merivale, Herman.= 1806-1874. Historical writer. Bro. to C. M.

=Merrick, James.= 1720-1769. Poet. His poem The Chameleon is well
known.

=Miall, Edward.= 1809-1881. Political writer. Author Ethics of
Non-Conformity, The Voluntary Principle, etc.

=Mickle, Wm. Julius.= 1734-1788. Scotch poet. His poem, Cumnor Hall,
suggested Scott's Kenilworth. _See Works of, 1808._

=Middleton, Conyers.= 1683-1750. Theologian. M. wrote a Life of Cicero
and a Free Inquiry into the Miraculous Powers of the Church.

=Middleton, Thomas.= 1570-1627. Dramatist. The Witch of Edmonton, a
tragi-comedy, is his most noted play. _See Dyce's edition, 1840._

=Mill, James.= 1773-1836. Scotch historian and philologist. Author of
an impartial Hist. British India, Analysis of the Mind, etc.

=Mill, John Stuart.= 1806-1873. Philosopher. Son to J. M. A profound
but cold thinker and writer. Author System of Logic, Political
Economy, Liberty, Subjection of Women, etc. _See Autobiography,
Table's Eng. Lit., and Caroline Fox's Memories of old Friends._ _Pub.
Apl. Har. Ho. Lit._

=Miller, Hugh.= 1802-1856. Geologist. Author Old Red Sandstone,
Footprints of the Creator, etc., works which greatly helped to
popularize the study of geology. _See Life, by Peter Bayne._ _Pub.
Ca._

=Miller, Thomas.= 180 Poet and novelist. Author Rural Sketches,
Country Scenes, Fair Rosamond, Songs for British Riflemen, etc. _Pub.
Rou._

=Milman, Henry Hart=. 1791-1868. Poet and historian. M. was author of
Fazio, a successful drama, of an excellent Hist. of the Jews, of
numerous poems, and editor of an annotated Gibbon. _Pub. Arm. Har.
Lit. Por. Put. Rou._

=Milnes [milnz], Richard Monckton, Lord Houghton.= 180 Poet and
litterateur. Author Poems of Many Years, Life of Keats, etc. _See
Stedman's Victorian Poets._ _Pub. Rob._

=Milton, John.= 1608-1674. Poet. His literary life sharply defines
itself into 3 periods; in the first, 1626-1640, he wrote the poems
L'Allegro, Il Penseroso, the Pastoral of Comus, and the elegy Lycidas.
During the second, 1640-1660, he wrote prose treatises, mainly
controversial, such as the Areopagitica, and his sonnets. After 1660
came the great epics, Paradise Lost, and Paradise Regained, and the
choral drama Samson Agonistes. A great artist, he created the Eng.
epic, infusing it with his own severe strength and dignity. He had no
humor or feeling for dramatic situation but he could be both graceful
and tender as his early poems show. He was the great Puritan poet. Of
the numerous Lives of Milton the best are, _Masson's and Mark
Pattison's Milton in Eng. Men of Letters. Pickering's, Rossetti's and
Masson's are among the best editions of his poems. For complete
edition of his prose works see Bohn's Standard Library._ _See Hines's
Study of Paradise Lost._ _Pub. Mac._

=Minto, Wm.= 184 Litterateur. Author Characteristics of Eng.
Poets, from Chaucer to Shirley, Manual of Eng. Prose Lit., Defoe in
Eng. Men of Letters, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Mitford, John.= 1781-1859. Poet and critic.

=Mitford, Mary Russell.= 1786-1855. Miscellaneous writer. Author of
the tragedies Julian, Rienzi, Foscari, etc., and the charming series
of those sketches entitled Our Village. _See Fields' Yesterdays with
Authors, and The Friendships of Mary Russell Mitford._ _Pub. Har._

=Mitford, Wm.= 1744-1827. Historian. Author Hist. of Greece, etc. _See
Life, by Lord Redesdale._

=Mivart, St. George.= 182 Naturalist. Author The Genesis of
Species, Contemporary Evolution, The Cat, etc. _Pub. Apl. Mac. Scr._

=Moberly, Geo.= 180 Bp. Salisbury. Religious writer. _Pub. Dut._

=Moir [moi'[e^]r], David Macbeth.= 1798-1851. Scotch poet and
novelist.

=Molesworth, Mrs. Mary Louisa [Stewart]=, "Ennis Graham." 184
Scotch novelist. Author of the novels Hathercourt and Miss Bouverie,
and of numerous excellent juvenile works of which The Cuckoo Clock,
Carrots, and The Tapestry Room are well-known examples. _See The
Spectator, Jan. 1880, Jan. 1881, and Jan. 1882._ _Pub. Har. Ho. Mac.
Rou._

=Monboddo, Lord.= See Burnet, James.

=Montagu, Chas. Earl of Halifax.= 1661-1715. Poet. Co-author with
Prior of The City Mouse and the Country Mouse, and author of
miscellaneous poems. _See Johnson's Lives of the Poets._

=Montagu, Mrs. Elizabeth.= 1720-1800. Founder of the Blue Stocking
Club and author of a once famous essay on the Genius of Shakespeare.
_See Doran's A Lady of the Last Century._

=Montagu, Lady Mary Wortley.= 1690-1762. Famous for her brilliant and
satirical Letters. _See Letters of, edited by Mrs. S.J. Hale, N. Y.,
1856._

=Montgomery [m[o^]nt-g[)u]m-[)e]r-[)i]], James.= 1771-1854. Scotch
poet. His verse is not strong, but some of his hymns are general
favorites. _See Critical Essays, by A. K. H. Boyd._ _Pub. Hou. Rou._

=Montgomery, Robert.= 1808-1855. Poet. Author Satan, etc. Style
stilted, showy, and unnatural. _See Macauley's Miscellaneous Essays._

=Montrose, Marquis of.= See Grahame, James.

=Moore, Edward.= 1712-1757. Dramatist. Author of the tragedy, The
Gamester.

=Moore, John.= 1730-1802. Scotch novelist. Author Zeluco, Edward,
Mordaunt, etc. _See Works, with Memoir, 7 vols., Edinburgh, 1820._

=Moore, Thomas.= 1779-1852. Irish poet. Author of Irish Melodies,
which take high rank as lyrics, Lalla Rookh, a vol. of brilliant and
showy oriental poetry, and of much other verse, as well as several
prose works. Though by no means a great poet, he has always been a
popular one. _See R. H. Montgomery's Life of, 1850; also Earl
Russell's edition of Moore's Diary._ _Pub. Apl. Arm. Clx. Har. Hou.
Le. Lip. For. Rou. Scr._

=More, Hannah.= 1745-1833. Dramatist and ethical writer. Author of
Percy, a drama, and of numerous popular moral tales, of which The
Shepherd of Salisbury Plain is the most famous. _See complete works,
1853._ _See Lives by Shaw, Roberts, Thompson, and Smith._ _Pub. Ca.
Har. Lip._

=More, Henry.= 1614-1687. Philosopher. A writer whose mystical
theories are expressed in a clear, limpid style.

=More, Sir Thomas.= 1480-1530. Philosopher. His famous prose romance,
The Utopia, embodies many of his philosophical views. _See Life by Sir
James Mackintosh._ _Pub. Mac._

=Morell, Thomas.= 1703-1784. Philologist. Author of the text of the
Oratorios of Joshua and Judas Maccabaeus.

=Morgan, Lady Sydney Owenson.= 1783-1859. Irish novelist. Author Wild
Irish Girl, Absenteeism, etc. A voluminous author, spirited but
wanting in refinement.

=Morier, James.= 1780-1849. Oriental novelist. Hajji Baba is his most
noted work. _Pub. Rou._

=Morley, Henry.= 182 Author Hist. Eng. Lit., Tables of Eng.
Lit., Journal of a London Playgoer, Life of Palissy the Potter, etc.
_Pub. Cas._

=Morley, John.= 183 Essayist and biographer. Author Lives of
Voltaire and Rousseau, Limits of the Historic Method, On Compromise,
Burke on Eng. Men of Letters, etc. _Pub. Apl. Har._

=Morris, Wm.= 183 The Defence of Guinevere, Life and Death of
Jason, and The Earthly Paradise are his chief poems. His verse is
mainly classical or mediaeval in subject and epic in form. _See
Stedman's Victorian Poets and Swinburne's Essays and Studies._ _Pub.
Rob._

=Mortimer, Mrs. Favell Lee.= 1802-1878. Religious writer. Author
Reading Without Tears, Peep of Day Series, etc. _Pub. Ca. Har. Hou._

=Morton, Thomas.= 1764-1838. Dramatist. Author Speed the Plough,
Secrets Worth Knowing, etc. _See Gentleman's Mag. Dec. 1838._

=Moss, Thomas.= 1740-1808. Poet. Author of the famous poem beginning
"Pity the sorrows of a poor Old Man."

=Motherwell, Wm.= 1797-1858. Scotch poet. Jeanie Morrison, The
Cavalier's Song, and others of his ballads possess great lyric beauty.
_See edition 1849._

=Mozley, James Bowling.= 1813-1878. Theologian. Author Lect. on the
Miracles, On Subscription to the Articles, Sermons, Essays,
Historical, Theological, etc. A clear, masterly thinker. _Pub. Dut._

=Mozley, Thomas.= 180 Bro. to J. B. M. Author Reminiscences of
Oriel College and the Oxford Movement. _Pub. Hou._

=Mudie [moo'd[)i] or m[=u]'d[)i]] Robert.= Scotch naturalist. Author
of some 90 vols. mainly on natural history; British Birds is his most
important work. _Pub. Har._

=Muller, Friedric Max.= 182 German philologist. Author Chips
from a German Workshop, Science of Lang., Hist. Ancient Sanskrit Lit.,
etc. _Pub. Mac. Scr._

=Muloch, Dinah Maria.= See Craik, Mrs.

=Munday, Anthony.= 1553-1633. Dramatist. _See Carew Hazlitt's Early
English Literature._

=Murchison, Sir Roderick I.= 1792-1871. Geologist of note. _See
Memoirs of, by Geikie, 2 vols., London, 1874._

=Mure, Wm.= 1799-1860. Scotch historian. Author Critical Hist., Lang.
and Lit. of Ancient Greece, The Calendar of the Zodiac of Ancient
Egypt, etc.

=Murphy, Arthur.= 1730-1805. Dramatist. Of his 23 plays The Grecian
Daughter and The Way to Keep Him were the most popular.

=Murray, Alexander.= 1775-1813. Scotch philologist. Author Hist.
European Languages.

=Murray, Hugh.= 1779-1841. Scotch geographer. Author of the
Encyclopedia of Geography, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Myers, Ernest.= 18-- ----. Poet. Author of The Puritans, The Defence
of Rome, and other Poems, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Myers, Frederic Wm. Henry.= 184 Poet and litterateur. Author of
St. Paul, a poem, The Renewal of Youth and other Poems, Wordsworth in
Eng. Men of Letters, and Essays Modern and Classical. A thoughtful
writer, possessing a graceful and scholarly style. _Pub. Har. Mac.
Ran._




=Nabbes, Thomas.= 1600-1645. Dramatist.

=Nairne, Baroness.= See Oliphant, Carolina.

=Napier, Admiral Sir Chas.= 1786-1860. Military historian. Cousin to
Sir C. J. N. Author Hist. Baltic Campaign, etc. _See Life and
Correspondence, 1862._

=Napier, Gen. Sir Chas. James.= 1782-1853. Author Lights and Shadows
of Military Life, Hist. Ionian Islands, etc. _See Life and Opinions
of, 4 vols., London, 1857._

=Napier, Capt. Henry Edward.= 1789-1853. Historian. Bro. to Sir C. J.
N. Author of a valuable Hist. of Florence in 7 vols. Style easy and
flowing.

=Napier, John.= 1550-1617. Scotch mathematical writer. Inventor of
logarithms.

=Napier, Macvey.= 1776-1847. Scotch writer. Editor of the supplement
and 7th edition of the Encyc. Brit. and for 17 years editor of the
Edinburgh Rev.

=Napier, Mark.= 179 Biographer. Author Memorials of Montrose,
Life and Times of Montrose, etc.

=Napier, Gen. Sir Wm. Francis Patrick.= 1785-1860. Military historian.
Bro. to Sir. C. J. N. and H. E. N. His great work is the Hist. of the
Peninsular War, a work of great value, possessing a perennial charm.
_See H. Martineau's Biographical Sketches, and Life by H. A. Bruce,
1863._ _Pub. Arm. Rou._

=Nares, Edward.= 1762-1841. Elements of General Hist. and the novel,
Thinks I to Myself, are among his chief works.

=Nares, Robert.= 1753-1829. Critical and theological writer. Cousin to
E. N.

=Nash, Thomas.= 1577-1600. Dramatist. Author Summer's Last Will and
Testament, and of many brilliant satirical pamphlets. _See edition of
Pierre Penniless, with Life of Nash by Collier, 1842._

=Neville, Henry.= 1620-1694. Political philosopher. Author of Plato
Redivivus, a dialogue concerning government.

=Newcastle, Margaret, Duchess of.= 1624-1673. An untiring writer of
tasteless works in verse and prose. _See Poems of, edited by E.
Brydges, 1813._

=Newcome, Wm.= 1729-1800. Abp. Armagh. Theologian. Author Harmony of
the Gospels, etc.

=Newman, Francis Wm.= 180 Miscellaneous writer. Author of
Phases of Faith, etc. He has written largely on religious topics from
a rationalistic standpoint.

=Newman, Cardinal John Henry.= 180 Theologian. Bro. to F. W. N.
Author Tract No. 90, Parochial Sermons, Theory of Religious Belief,
The Grammar of Assent, Apologia Pro Vita Sua, Poems, etc. The Apologia
is one of the very finest of autobiographies. Style clear, polished,
and logical. _See Century Mag. June, 1882._ _Pub. Cath._

=Newton, Sir Isaac.= 1642-1727. Mathematical philosopher. A writer of
clear, comprehensive intellect, Author of the Principia and a valuable
treatise on Optics, etc. _See Brewster's Life of._ _Pub. Mac._

=Newton, John.= 1722-1807. Devotional writer. Co-author with Cowper of
the Olney Hymns. _See Works of London, 6 vols. 8vo, 1816._

=Nichol, John.= 183 Scotch litterateur. Author Sketch Am. Lit.,
the drama of Hannibal, Tables of European Lit. and Hist., and a
brilliant monograph on Byron in Eng. Men of Letters. _See Lit. World.
Feb. 24, 1883._ _Pub. Apl. Har._

=Nichol, John Pringle.= 1804-1859. Astronomer. Author The Solar
System, The Stellar Heavens, Dict. Physical Sciences, etc.

=Nicholas, Thomas.= 1820-1879. Ethnologist and historian. Author
Pedigree of the Eng. People, Hist. of Wales, etc.

=Nicholson, Wm.= 1655-1727. Abp. Cashel. Antiquarian writer.

=Nicol, Henry.= 1845-1881. Philologist. Author Hist. Eng. Sounds.

=Nicolas, Sir Nicholas Harris.= 1799-1848. Genealogist. Author Hist.
Orders of Knighthood of the Brit. Empire, etc.

=Nicoll, Robert.= 1814-1837. Scotch poet.

=Noel-Fearn, Henry= [Christmas]. 1811-1868. Miscellaneous writer.
Author Science and History, Preachers and Preaching, etc.

=Norris, John.= 1657-1711. Platonic philosopher. Author Theory of the
Ideal World, etc.

=North, Christopher.= See Wilson, John.

=Norton, Mrs. Caroline Elizabeth Sheridan= [Lady Maxwell]. 1808-1877.
Poet and novelist. Her verse has much grace and intensity of feeling.
Bingen on the Rhine is her most quoted poem. _Pub. Har. Lip. Mac.
Ran._

=Norton, Thomas.= 1532-1584. Dramatist. Co-author with Sackville of
the tragedy Ferrex and Porrex, and assistant of Sternhold and Hopkins
in their metrical version of the Psalms.

=Nugent, Lord.= See Grenville, George.




=Occam, Wm. of.= 1270-1347. Philosopher. Defender of the doctrine of
Nominalism and the greatest logician of the Middle Ages.

=Occleve, Thos.= c. 1370-1454. Poet. His verse has little merit.

=O'Hare, Kane.= 1722-1782. Irish dramatist.

=O'Keefe, John.= 1747-1833. Irish dramatist. The best of his numerous
plays and operas, some of which are still acted, is Wild Oats.

=Oldham, John.= 1653-1683. Poet. Author of Satires against the
Jesuits. Style spirited and forcible. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Oldmixon, John.= 1673-1742. Dramatist and historian. His plays and
histories are of slight value, and his chief title to remembrance is
Pope's satire upon him in The Dunciad.

=Oldys, Wm.= 1696-1761. Biographer and antiquarian. Best known by his
famous little poem, The Fly and the Cup of Ale.

=Oliphant, Carolina, Baroness Nairne.= 1766-1845. Scotch poet. Her
songs, such as Land o' the Leal, Caller Herrin', etc., take a high
rank. _See Complete Works, with Life by C. Rogers, Edinburgh, 1869._

=Oliphant, Laurence.= 182 Satirist and miscellaneous writer.
Author of Piccadilly, a Fragment of Contemporaneous Biography, Tender
Recollections of Irene McGillicuddy, Altiora Peto, etc. _Pub. Apl.
Har._

=Oliphant, Mrs. Margaret.= 182 Novelist. Author of a long series
of novels, all good, and some very fine, and much well written
biography. Her style is even, her turns of expression felicitous and
her character drawing truthful. The Perpetual Curate, Chronicles of
Carlingford, Zaidee, Harry Joscelyn, Son of the Soil, Lady Jane, The
Little Pilgrim, and the Literary Hist. of England are some of her best
books. Few authors have written so much and so uniformly well. _Pub.
Apl. Har. Ho. Lip. Mac. Por._

=O'Meara, Barry Edward.= 1780-1836. Napoleonic writer. Author Letters
from St. Helena, Memoirs of Napoleon, Napoleon in Exile, etc. _Pub.
Arm. Wid._

=Opie, Mrs. Amelia= [Alderson]. 1769-1853. Novelist and poet. Father
and Daughter is her best novel, The Orphan Boy her most familiar poem.
Style simple and pathetic. _See Miss Brightwell's Life of, London,
1834, and H. Martineau's Biographical Sketches._ _Pub. Ca._

=Orme, Robert.= 1728-1801. Historian. Hist. British in India, etc.

=O'Shaughnessy [o'shaw'n[)e]-s[)i], Arthur W. E.= 1844-1881. Author
Songs of a Worker, Lays of France, Music and Moonlight, etc. _See
Stedman's Victorian Poets, and Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4, 2d edition._

=Ossian.= Mythical Keltic bard. See Macpherson, James.

=Ottley, Wm. Young.= 1771-1836. Art writer. Author The Italian School
of Design, Engravers and their Works, etc.

=Otway, Thomas.= 1651-1685. Dramatist. A tragic writer of great
pathos. His greatest works, Venice Preserved and The Orphan are still
occasionally acted. _See Works with Life, by Thornton, 1813._

=Ouida.= See De la Rame, Louisa.

=Ousely [ooz'l[)i]], Sir Wm.= 1771-1842. Orientalist. Author Oriental
Collections, Travels in Persia, etc.

=Overbury, Sir Thomas.= 1581-1613. Poet and philosopher. Characters,
his chief work, contains an exquisite and oft quoted description of A
Fair and Happy Milkmaid.

=Owen, John.= 1616-1683. Theologian. Style heavy and labored. _See
edition of 1826 with Life._ _Pub. P. B._

=Owen, Richard.= 180 Scientific writer of note. Author Lect. on
Comparative Anatomy, etc.

=Owen, Robert.= 1771-1858. Writer on social reforms. _See H.
Martineau's Biographical Sketches._

=Owenson, Sydney.= See Morgan, Lady.

=Oxenden, Ashton.= 180 Bp. Montreal. Religious writer. Author
Pathway of Safety, Our Church and her Services, Thoughts for Lent,
etc. _Pub. Dut. Ran. Wh._

=Oxenford, John.= 1812-1877. Dramatist and critic. Translator of
Goethe's Autobiography.




=Paley, Frederic Apthorp.= 181 Classical scholar. Grandson to W.
P. Editor and translator of numerous classical works.

=Paley, Wm.= 1743-1805. Moral philosopher. Author Natural Theology,
Elements of Moral and Political Philosophy, etc. _See Complete Works,
4 vols., London, 1838, biography by Meadley, 1839._ _Pub. Ca. Nel.
Har._

=Palgrave [pawl'gr[=a]v], Sir Francis.= 1788-1861. Historian. Author
Hist. of the Anglo-Saxons, Rise and Progress of the Eng. Commonwealth,
Anglo-Saxon Period, Hist. of Normandy and of England, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Palgrave, Francis Turner.= 182 Poet and critic. Son to F. P.
Author Essays on Art, Hymns, Lyrical Poems, etc. _See Stedman's
Victorian Poets._ _Pub. Mac. Por. Ran. Rou._

=Palgrave, Wm. Gifford.= 182 Traveller. Son to F. P. Author
Essays on the Eastern Question, Dutch Guiana, Herman Agha, etc. _Pub.
Ho. Mac._

=Palmer, Sir Roundell= [Baron Selborne]. 181 Author of the Book
of Praise. _Pub. Mac._

=Pardoe [par'd[=o]], Julia.= 1806-1862. Novelist and historical
writer. Author Court and Reign of Francis I., etc. _Pub. Har. Pet._

=Paris, Matthew.= ---- 1259. Historical writer. _See Bohn's
Antiquarian Library._

=Park, Mungo.= 1771-1805. Scotch explorer and writer of travels. _Pub.
Har._

=Parker, John Henry.= 180 Writer on Architecture. Author
Glossary of Arch., Introduction to the Study of Gothic Arch., Domestic
Arch. of the Middle Ages, etc., _Pub. Lit._

=Parnell [par'nell], Thomas.= 1669-1718. Poet. Author of The Hermit,
etc. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._ _Pub. Hou._

=Parr, Harriet= ["Holme Lee"]. 18-- ----. Novelist. Author Sylvan
Holt's Daughter, Kathie Brande, For Richer for Poorer, etc. _Pub. Har.
Por._

=Parr, Mrs. Louisa.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Author Dorothy Fox, Adam and
Eve, etc. _Pub. Ho. Lip._

=Parr, Samuel.= 1747-1825. Classical scholar and critic. _See Field's
Memoirs of, 1828._

=Pater, Walter H.= 183 Author Studies on the Hist. of the
Renaissance. _Pub. Mac._

=Patmore, Coventry Kearsey Dighton.= 182 Poet. Author Angel in
the House, Faithful Forever, and other vols. of rather commonplace
verse. _See Stedman's Victorian Poets._ _Pub. Dut. Mac._

=Pattison, Mark.= 181 Author Tendencies of Religious Thought in
England, a noted Biography of Isaac Casaubon, Milton in Eng. Men. of
Letters, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Payn, James.= 183 Novelist. A writer of excellent stories; Lost
Sir Massingberd, and By Proxy, being among the best. _Pub. Apl. Har.
Pet._

=Peacock, Thos. Love.= 1785-1866. Novelist and poet. Maid Marian,
Headlong Hall, etc., are lively, witty novels. _See Complete Works
edited by Cole, 1875._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4._

=Pearson, Charles Henry.= 183 Historian. Author Hist. of England
in the Early and Middle Ages. _Pub. Put._

=Pearson, John.= 1613-1686. Bp. Chester. Theologian. His Exposition of
the Creed is still a standard theological work. _Pub. Apl. Mac._

=Pecock, Reginald.= 1390-1460. Bp. Chichester. Theologian. Author of
The Repressor, etc. _See Morley's Eng. Writers, vol. 2._

=Peele, George.= 1552-1598. Dramatist and poet. Author Arraignment of
Paris, Absalom, Edward I., etc. In places Peele's verse is very
musical. _See Lamb's Dramatic Poets; also Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1,
and Ulrici's Dramatic Art._

=Penn, Wm.= 1644-1718. No Cross No Crown, his most noted work, sets
forth the doctrines of the Quakers. _See Lives, by H. Dixon, Janney,
and Wirt._

=Pennant, Thomas.= 1726-1798. Antiquarian and writer on natural
history.

=Pennell, Henry Cholmondeley [ch[)u]m'l[)i]].= 183 Poet. Author
of Puck on Pegasus, Pegasus Re-saddled, etc., and several works on
Angling. _Pub. Rou._

=Pepys [peeps or p[)e]ps], Samuel.= 1633-1703. Author of a famous
Diary presenting an extremely lifelike picture of the time of Charles
II. _See Samuel Pepys and the World he Lived In, by Henry B. Wheatly._
_See Braybrooke edition_, _pub. Apl._; _Bright edition, London_, _pub.
Bi._

=Percy, Thos.= 1728-1811. Bp. Dromore. Poet and editor of the famous
Reliques of Ancient Eng. Poetry, a work of great influence upon
subsequent Eng. verse. _See Hales's and Furnivall's edition, 1868._
_Pub. Por. Rou._

=Phillimore, John George.= 1809-1865. Jurist. Author Hist. Law of
Evidence, Principles and Maxims of Jurisprudence. _Pub. Mac._

=Phillimore, Robert Joseph.= 181 Jurist. Bro. to J. G. P. Author
Civil and Canon Law, Eccl. Law Church of England, etc. _Pub. Jo._

=Philips, Ambrose.= 1675-1749. Dramatist. A writer of trifling merit,
who is chiefly remembered on account of Pope's vindictive satire upon
him.

=Philips, John.= 1676-1708. Poet. Author of the mock-heroic poem The
Splendid Shilling.

=Philips, Mrs. Katharine.= 1631-1664. Poet. Known as "The Matchless
Orinda."

=Phillips, Halliwell.= See Halliwell-Phillips.

=Pickering, Ellen.= ---- 1843. Novelist. Author Who Shall be Heir,
Secret Foe, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Pindar, Peter.= See Wolcott, John.

=Pinkerton, John.= 1758-1826. Scotch historian and antiquary. His
Hist. of Scotland and other works are fiercely controversial in tone.

=Piozzi [p[=e]-[)o]t'see], Mrs. Hester [Lynch]. Mrs. Thrale.=
1740-1821. Author Anecdotes of Dr. Johnson, etc., and the well-known
poem The Three Warnings. _See Autobiography, Letters, etc., 1861._

=Pitt, Wm., Lord Chatham.= 1708-1778. Statesman. His numerous Speeches
rank among the finest of their class.

=Planche [plon-sh[=a]'], James Robinson.= 1796-1870. Dramatist. A
prolific writer of dramas, fairy extravaganzas and farces; Prince
Charming, Yellow Dwarf, etc. _See Bric-a-brac Series, 1st vol., and
The Biograph, March, 1880._

=Plumptre, Edward Hayes.= 182 Poet and translator. Author
Lazarus and other Poems, etc., Byways of Scripture, etc., and
translation of Sophocles and AEschylus. His verse is didactic in
character. _Pub. Dut. Mac. Rou._

=Pole, Reginald, Cardinal.= 1500-1558. Theological writer.

=Pollock, Frederick.= 184 Jurist. Author Principles of Contract,
Digest of Law of Partnership, Spinoza: his Life and Philosophy, and
The Land Laws in Macmillan's Eng. Citizen Series. _Pub. Mac. Th._

=Pollock, Robert.= 1799-1827. Scotch poet. Author of The Course of
Time, a heavy, didactic, blank-verse poem, once very popular. _Pub.
Apl. Ca. Clx._

=Pomfret, John.= 1667-1703. Poet. Author of The Choice. _See Life, by
Dr. Johnson._

=Poole, John.= 1786-1872. Dramatist and humorist. Author of the
comedy, Paul Pry, Little Pedlington, a vol. of witty sketches, The
Comic Sketch-Book, etc.

=Poole, Matthew.= 1624-1679. Biblical Commentator. _Pub. Ca._

=Pope, Alexander.= 1688-1744. A correct, polished poet whose verse
lacks sentiment and feeling. The heroic couplet is his usual measure.
His translation of Homer, though a fine effort, lacks the freshness
and spontaneity of its original. His chief poems are Essay on Man,
Moral Essays, The Dunciad, a talented but terrible satire, and The
Rape of the Lock, a brilliant, glittering piece of literary trifling.
_See editions of, by A. W. Ward, Cowden-Clarke, and Rossetti._ _See
Lowell's My Study Windows; also Leslie Stephen's Pope in Eng. Men of
Letters._ _Pub. Apl. Le. Mac. Rou._

=Porson, Richard.= 1759-1808. Classical scholar and writer of note.
_See Watson's Life of, 1861._

=Porter, Anna Maria.= 1781-1832. Novelist. Don Sebastian is perhaps
the best of her numerous novels.

=Porter, Jane.= 1776-1850. Novelist. Sister to A. M. P. The famous
romances Thaddeus of Warsaw and Scottish Chiefs are her chief works.
_Pub. Apl. Le. Lip. Por._

=Powell, Baden.= 1796-1860. Philosopher. Author Hist. Nat. Philosophy,
Spirit of Inductive Philosophy, Study and Evidence of Christianity,
etc.

=Poynter, E. Frances.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Author My Little Lady,
Ersilia, Among the Hills, etc. _Pub. Ho._

=Praed [pr[=a]d], Winthrop Mackworth.= 1802-1839. Poet. A writer of
pleasing verse, of which the Belle of the Ball is a good example. _See
Complete Works, edited by Sir Geo. Young._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets,
vol. 4._ _Pub. Arm._

=Price, Bonamy.= 180 Political economist. Author Practical
Political Economy, Currency and Banking, Principles of Currency, etc.
_Pub. Apl._

=Prideaux [pr[)i]d'o, or pr[)i]d-[)u]x], Humphrey.= 1648-1724.
Theologian. Noted for his Connection of the Old and New Testaments.
_Pub. Har. Mac._

=Priestley, Joseph.= 1733-1804. Theologian and scientist. Author of
over 300 books on chemistry, theology, metaphysics, etc. _See Works
of, 1824, 26 vols._ _See Life of, by Corry._

=Pringle, Thomas.= 1789-1834. Scotch poet. His best poem is the
spirited Afar in the Desert. _See Grant Wilson's Poets of Scotland._

=Prior, Matthew.= 1664-1721. Poet. A sprightly writer whose light and
airy style is seen to best advantage in his comic narrative poems.
_See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._ _Pub. Hou._

=Procter, Adelaide Anne.= 1825-1864. Poet. Dau. to B. W. P. Author
Legends and Lyrics. _See Stedman's Victorian Poets._ _Pub. Hou._

=Procter, Bryan Waller, "Barry Cornwall."= 1790-1874. Poet. A writer
of somewhat over-praised lyric verse. The tragedy of Mirandola is his
finest dramatic effort. _See Autobiography. Compare Stedman's
Victorian Poets and Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4._

=Proctor Richard Anthony.= 183 Astronomer. Author Other Worlds
than Ours, Our Place Among the Infinities, etc. _Pub. Apl. Arm. Lip.
Put._

=Prout, Father.= See Mahoney, Francis.

=Prynne, Wm.= 1600-1669. Political and antiquarian writer.

=Pugin [p[=u]-jin], Augustus.= 1792-1832. Architectural writer of
note.

=Pugin, Augustin Welby Northmore.= 1812-1852. Architect. Son to A. P.
Author Examples of Gothic Architecture, Glossary of Eccl. Ornament,
etc. _See Ferrey's Recollections of A. W. N. Pugin and Augustus Pugin,
1861._

=Purchas, Samuel.= 1577-1628. Chronicler and compiler of travels.

=Pusey [p[=u]'z[)i]], Edward Bouverie.= 1800-1882. Theologian. Author
Hist. Councils of the Church, Doctrine of the Real Presence, etc, and
many of the Tracts for the Times. The earlier Ritualists were named
Puseyites. His influence greatly deepened the religious feeling of the
Anglican Church. _See Life, by Liddon._ _Pub. Apl._

=Pusey, Philip Edward.= 18--  1880. Theological writer. Son to E. B. P.

=Puttenham, George.= 1530-c. 1600. Author of The Art of Eng. Poesie.

=Pye, Henry James.= 1745-1813. Poet. Author of very indifferent verse.




=Quarles, Francis.= 1592-1644. Poet. An ingenious versifier, very
popular in his own day, and now chiefly known by his Divine Emblems
and a vol. of prose maxims entitled Enchiridion.

=Quarles, John.= 1624-1665. Poet. Son to F. Q. Author Divine
Meditations, etc. His verse is marked by the same fantastic, labored
conceits as that of his father.

=Quincey, Thos. de.= See De Quincey.




=Radcliffe, Mrs. Ann [Ward].= 1764-1823. Novelist. A writer of
powerful sensational romances, the best known of which are The
Mysteries of Udolpho and Romance of the Forest. _See Memoir of, by
Talfourd, and Memoir of, by Miss Rossetti._ _Pub. Clx. Rou._

=Raleigh [raw'l[)i]], Sir Walter.= 1532-1618. His chief work, The
Hist. of the World, has great literary merit. _See Lives, by
Whitehead, Oldys, Birch, Cayley, Thomson, Tytler, Napier, St. John,
and Edwards. See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=Ramsay [r[)a]m'z[)i]], Allan.= 1685-1758. Scotch poet. Author of the
pastoral poem The Gentle Shepherd. _See edition 1800, with Life; also
Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._

=Ramsay, Edward Bannerman.= 1793-1872. Author of the famous
Reminiscences of Scottish Life and Character, Sermons, Pulpit
Table-Talk, etc. _See 23d edition of the Reminiscences, 1874, and
Memorials and Recollections, by C. Rogers._

=Randolph, Thos.= 1605-1634. Poet and dramatist. His works are
inferior in quality. The Jealous Lover is one of his plays. _See Works
of, edited by Carew Hazlitt, 1875, and Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Rankine, Wm. John Macquorn.= 1820-1872. Writer on mechanics. Author
Applied Mechanics, The Steam Engine, Songs and Fables, etc. _See
Memoir, by P. G. Tait._ _Pub. Apl. Mac._

=Rawlinson, George Henry.= 181 Historian. Author The Five Great
Monarchies of the Eastern World, Manual of Ancient Hist., The Seventh
Great Oriental Monarchy, etc. _Pub. Apl. Do. Est. Har. Mac._

=Rawlinson, Sir Henry Creswicke.= 181 Archaeological writer of
note. Bro. to G. H. R.

=Ray, John.= 1628-1705. Naturalist. Author of the Historia Plantarum,
etc. _See Life, by Wm. Derham, 1760._

=Reach, Angus Bethune.= 1821-1856. Novelist and miscellaneous writer.
Author of Leonard Lindsay, The Natural Hist. of Bores and Humbugs, The
Comic Bradshaw, etc. _See Chas. Mackay's Recollections._ _Pub. Rou._

=Reade, Charles.= 181 Novelist. A writer of strong genius, whose
style is piquant and aggressive. Put Yourself in his Place, Griffith
Gaunt, The Cloister and the Hearth, and Christie Johnstone are among
his best novels. _See Atlantic Monthly, Aug. 1864._ _Pub. Har._

=Redding, Cyrus.= 1785-1870. Miscellaneous writer. Author of A Wife
and Not a Wife, Remarkable Misers, Past Celebrities, etc.

=Reeve, Clara.= 1725-1803. Novelist. Author Old English Baron, etc.

=Reeve, Lovell.= 1814-1865. Conchologist. Author Conchologia Iconica,
Elements of Conchology, Conchologia Systematica, etc. _Pub. Put._

=Reeves, Mrs. Helen Buckingham [Mathers].= 185 Novelist. Author
of Cherry Ripe, Comin' thro' the Rye, My Lady Green Sleeves, As He
Comes Up the Stair, Land o' the Leal, Sam's Sweetheart, etc. _Pub.
Apl._

=Reid, Mayne.= 1818-1883. Author of tales of adventure for young
readers. _Pub. Rou. Sh._

=Reid, Thomas.= 1710-1796. Scotch metaphysician. Author Inquiry into
the Human Mind, Essays on the Intellectual Powers, etc. _See
Hamilton's edition of Reid, 1846._

=Reynolds, Frederick.= 1765-1841. Dramatist. Author of nearly 100
plays, of which The Dramatist and Folly as it Flies are the best.

=Reynolds, George W. M.= ---- 1879. Novelist. Author Mysteries of
London, Reformed Highwayman, etc. Style sensational, and influence
pernicious. _Pub. Di. Pet._

=Reynolds, Sir Joshua.= 1723-1792. Artist. Author Discourse on
Painting. _See Malone's edition of, 1797._ _See Lives by Malone,
Northcote, Farrington, Cotton, and Leslie, Mrs. Thackeray-Ritchie's
Miss Angel, and Reynolds as a Portrait Painter, by J. E. Collins._

=Ricardo [re-kar'do], David.= 1792-1823. Political economist. Author
High Price of Bullion, Principles of Political Economy and Taxation,
etc. _See McCulloch's edition, 1846._

=Rice, James.= 1843-1882. Novelist. Colleague of Walter Besant, and
author with him of Sweet Nelly My Heart's Delight, Golden Butterfly,
and other novels. See Besant, Walter. _Pub. Har._

=Richards, Alfred Bate.= 1820-1876. Poet and dramatist. Author of
Cromwell, Vandyck, and other dramas, Medea, and other vols. of poems,
and the novel So Very Human.

=Richardson, Chas.= 1775-1865. Lexicographer. Author of an Eng. Dict.
and The Study of Language.

=Richardson, Samuel.= 1689-1761. Novelist. Author Pamela, Clarissa
Harlowe, and Sir Charles Grandison. The slow movement of these stories
does not appeal readily to modern taste, but they display a wonderful
knowledge of the workings of the human heart. Clarissa, the best, is a
fine piece of realism. _See Taine's Eng. Lit., Masson's Novelists and
their Styles, and Leslie Stephen's Hours in a Library._ _Pub. Ho.
Rou._

=Richmond, Leigh.= 1772-1827. Moralist. Author The Dairyman's
Daughter, etc. _Pub. Ca. Phi. Rou._

=Riddell, Mrs. Charlotte Eliza Lawson.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Author
George Geith, A Life's Assize, The Senior Partner, etc. _Pub. Clx.
Est. Har. Pet._

=Riddell, Henry Scott.= 1798-1870. Scotch poet. _See Grant Wilson's
Poets of Scotland._

=Riddell, Mrs. J. H.= See Riddell, Mrs. Charlotte.

=Ritchie, Mrs. Anne Isabella.= See Thackeray-Ritchie.

=Ritchie, Leitch.= 1801-1865. Miscellaneous writer. Author of
Headpieces and Tailpieces, Wearyfoot Common, Romance of French
History, etc.

=Ritson, Joseph.= 1752-1803. Antiquary and critic.

=Roberts, Margaret.= 183 Novelist. Author Mademoiselle Mori,
Denise, The Atelier du Lys, In the Olden Time, On the Edge of the
Storm, Ose, Tempest tossed, Madame Fontenoy, Summerleigh Manor, etc.
_Pub. Ho._

=Robertson, Frederick Wm.= 1816-1853. Religious writer. Author 4 vols.
of sermons, which rank among the finest religious utterances of the
age. _See Life, by Stopford Brooke, and Blackwood's Mag., Aug. 1862._
_Pub. Dut. Har._

=Robertson, James Burton.= 180 Historical writer. Author Lect.
on Various Subjects of Ancient and Modern Hist., etc.

=Robertson, James Craigie.= 1813-1882. Ecclesiastical historian.
Author Hist. of the Christian Church, Biography of Thomas a Becket,
etc.

=Robertson, Thos. Wm.= 1829-1871. Dramatist. Author David Garrick,
Ours, Caste, M. P., and other lively and popular plays.

=Robertson, Wm.= 1721-1793. Scotch historian. Author Hist. Scotland,
Hist. Reign of Charles V., Hist. Discovery of America, etc. His style
is picturesque, but his statements are sometimes inaccurate. _See
Prescott's Robertson's Charles V. Pub. Har._

=Robinson, A. Mary F.= 185- ----. Poet and litterateur. Author of A
Handful of Honeysuckle, The Crowned Hippolytus, Rural England, and
Emily Bronte, in Famous Women Series, etc. _Pub. Rob._

=Robinson, Frederick Wm.= 183 Novelist. Author of A Bridge of
Glass, As Long as she Lived, Poor Zeph, Her Face was her Fortune,
Little Kate Kirby, Second-Cousin Sarah, Stern Necessity, True to
Herself, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Robinson, Henry Crabb.= 1775-1867. He left an entertaining Diary,
published in 1869. _Pub. Hou. Mac._

=Robinson, Mrs. Mary.= 1758-1800. Poet and actress. Known to her
contemporaries as "Perdita, the Fair."

=Rochester, Earl of.= See Wilmot, John.

=Rogers, Charles.= 182 Scotch antiquarian writer. Author of A
Century of Scottish Life, Boswelliana, Scotland: Social and Domestic,
etc.

=Rogers, Henry.= 1810-1877. Critic. Author Eclipse of Faith, Reason
and Faith, etc. _Pub. Rou. Scr._

=Rogers, Samuel.= 1763-1855. Poet. Author Pleasures of Memory, a fine
though labored production, Italy, etc. _See Hazlitt's Eng. Poets._
_Pub. Lip._

=Romilly, Sir Samuel.= 1757-1818. Jurist. Author of Speeches, etc.
_See Autobiography, 1840._

=Roscoe, Henry.= 1800-1836. Son to W. R. Author Lives of Eminent
Lawyers, etc. _Pub. Jo._

=Roscoe, Thos.= 1791-1871. Son to W. R. Translator of important
Italian works.

=Roscoe, Wm.= 1753-1831. Historian. Author Lives of Lorenzo de Medici
and Leo X., etc. A careful, painstaking writer, whose works, written
in an easy, flowing style, are standard of their kind. _See Life of,
by Henry Roscoe._

=Roscommon, Earl of.= See Dillon, Wentworth.

=Rose, George.= "Arthur Sketchley." 1830-1882. Litterateur. Best known
by his humorous Mrs. Brown sketches. _Pub. Rou._

=Rose, Henry John.= 1801-1873.} Authors of a General} Biographical
=Rose, Hugh James.= 1795-1838.} Dict., etc. Bro. to preceding.}

=Rose, Wm.= 1762-1790. Scotch pastoral poet. His Praise of the
Highland Maid is one of his best poems. _See Grant Wilson's Poetry of
Scotland._

=Rose, Wm. Stewart.= 1775-1843. Poet. Translator of Ariosto.

=Ross, Alexander.= 1699-1784. Scotch poet. Best known by his ballad
Woo'd and Married and a'. _See Irving's Scottish Writers._

=Ross-Church, Mrs. Florence [Marryatt].= 183 Novelist. Author
Her Lord and Master, The Prey of the Gods, No Intentions, etc. _Pub.
Har._

=Rossetti [r[)o]s-s[)e]t'tee], Christina Georgina.= 183 Poet.
Author of The Pageant, Sonnet of Sonnets, Goblin Market, etc. Style
serious and earnest. _See Stedman's Victorian Poets._ _Pub. Mac. Rob._

=Rossetti, Dante Gabriel.= 1828-1882. Poet and artist. Bro. to C. G.
R. A writer of the so-called Pre-Raphaelite school, whose verse is
passionate and musical. Sister Helen, The Blessed Damozel, and Rose
Mary are his most striking poems. _See Stedman's Victorian Poets,
Swinburne's Essays and Studies, Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4, 2d edition,
Essays Modern, by F. W. H. Myers, Wm. Sharp's_ _Record and Study of
Rossetti, Cornhill Mag. Feb. 1883, Contemporary Rev. Feb. 1883,
Harper's Mag. Nov. 1882, and English Illus. Mag. Oct. 1883._ _Pub.
Rob._

=Rossetti, Maria Francesca.= 1827-1875. Commentator on Dante. Sister
to two preceding. Author The Shadow of Dante, etc. _Pub. Rob._

=Rossetti, Wm. Michael.= 182 Biographer and critic. Author Fine
Art, etc. Bro. to three preceding. _Pub. Mac._

=Rowe [r[=o]], Nicholas.= 1673-1718. Dramatist and Shakespearean
editor. Author Jane Shore, Fair Penitent, etc. His dramas are
melancholy, but never licentious, like those of his contemporaries.

=Rowley, Wm.= fl. c. 1625. Dramatist. Colleague of Dekker and Ford in
the Witch of Edmonton, and of Massinger and Middleton in the Old Law.

=Roy, William.= fl. c. 1525. Poet. Author of a singular satire upon
Wolsey and the clergy, entitled Read me and be not Wroth, for I say
Nothing but Troth.

=Roydon, Matthew.= fl. c. 1585. Poet. Author of the beautiful Lament
for Astrophel, an elegy upon Sir Philip Sidney.

=Ruskin, John.= 181 Art critic. Author Modern Painters, Stones
of Venice, Seven Lamps of Architecture, Sesame and Lilies, Fors
Clavigera, etc. Style original, masterly, and of rare beauty. Its
chief defect is a vein of petulance and intolerance, which is
strongest in his latest books. _Pub. Wil._

=Russell, John, Earl.= 1792-1878. Statesman. Author Causes of the
French Revolution, Life and Times of Chas. James Fox, Establishment of
the Turks in Europe, etc. _Pub. Rob._

=Russell, John Scott.= 180 Engineer. Author Modern System of
Naval Architecture, a work of great practical value. _Pub. Apl._

=Russell, Michael.= 1781-1848. Bp. Glasgow. Scotch historian.

=Russell, Lady Rachel.= 1636-1723. Her Letters are of much literary
and historical value. _See Earl Russell's edition, 1854._

=Russell, Wm.= 1741-1793. Scotch historian. Author Hist. Modern
Europe, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Russell, Wm. Clark.= 184 Marine novelist. Author Wreck of the
Grosvenor, A Sailor's Sweetheart, An Ocean Free Lance, Jack's
Courtship, Little Loo, etc. Style original and spirited. _Pub. Har._

=Russell, Wm. Howard.= 182 Journalist. Author Hist. of the
Crimean War, Diary North and South, Diary in India, Hesperothen, etc.
_Pub. Har. Rou._

=Ryle, John Charles.= 181 Bp. Liverpool. A popular religious
writer. Author Expository Thoughts on the Gospels, etc. _Pub. Ca. Phi.
Ran._

=Rymer, Thos.= 1638-1714. Antiquary and critic. Author of Edgar, a
play, The Tragedies of the Last Age Considered, etc., and compiler of
Rymer's F[oe]dera, a collection of treatises, etc.




=Sackville, Chas., Earl of Dorset.= 1637-1705. Poet Author of the
bright, lively song To all you Ladies now on Land. _See Ward's Eng.
Poets, vol. 2._

=Sackville, Thos., Earl of Dorset and Lord Buckhurst.= 1536-1608.
Poet. Author of the Induction and one tale of the Mirror for
Magistrates, and, with Thos. Norton, of the tragedy of Gorboduc. _See
edition 1820._

=Sadler, Michael Thos.= 1780-1830. Author of The Law of Population,
etc.

=Sainsbury, Wm. Noel.= 182 Editor of Colonial Calendar of State
Papers, America and West Indies, 1574-1668, etc.

=St. John, Bayle.= 1822-1859. Miscellaneous writer. Son to J. A. St.
John. Author Village Life in Egypt, Memoirs of St. Simon, The Turks in
Europe, etc.

=St. John, Henry, Viscount Bolingbroke.= 1678-1751. Political
essayist. His Letter to Sir Wm. Windham [a vol. of 300 pages] is his
chief work.

=St. John, Horace Roscoe.= 183 Son to J. A. St. John. Author The
Indian Archipelago, Hist. British Conquests in India, etc.

=St. John, James Augustus.= 1801-1875. Miscellaneous writer. Author of
The Anatomy of Society, The Nemesis of Power, Manners and Customs of
Ancient Greece.

=St. John, Percy Bolingbroke.= 182 Writer of tales of adventure.
Son to J. A. St. John. Author The Arctic Crusoe, The Creole Bride, The
Red Queen, etc.

=St. John, Spenser.= 182 Son to J. A. St. John. Author Life in
the Forests of the Far West, etc.

=Saintsbury, Geo. Warner.= 184 Litterateur. Author Dryden, in
Eng. Men of Letters, Primer of French Lit., etc. _Pub. Har. Mac._

=Sala, George Augustus.= 182 Novelist, essayist, and journalist.
Author Quite Alone, Twice Round the Clock, Paris Herself Again, etc.
_Pub. Fu. Har. Rou._

=Sale, George.= 1680-1736. Orientalist. Translator of the Koran. _Pub.
Lip._

=Sanderson, Robert.= 1587-1663. Bp. Salisbury. Theological writer of
great learning. _Pub. Mac._

=Sandys, George.= 1577-1644. Poet and traveler. Translator of Ovid.
_See Tyler's Am. Lit. vol. 1._

=Sartoris, Mrs. Adelaide [Kemble].= 1816-1879. Author of A Week in a
French Country House, a work of great freshness and beauty, and of
Medusa and Other Tales.

=Savage, Marmion.= ---- 1872. Irish novelist. Author of The Bachelor of
the Albany, The Woman of Business, Reuben Medlicott, etc. _Pub. Apl._

=Savage, Richard.= 1698-1743. Poet. A writer of languid verse, and
held in remembrance mainly by Johnson's Biography of him.

=Saville, George, Marquess of Halifax.= 1630-1695. Political writer.
The literary merit of his treatises is considerable.

=Saville, Sir Henry.= 1549-1622. Antiquarian. Editor of a noted
edition of Chrysostom, 1613.

=Sawyer, Wm.= 182 Poet. Author of A Year of Song, The Legend of
Phillis, etc.

=Sayce, Archibald Henry.= 184 Philologist. Author of An Assyrian
Grammar, Principles of Comparative Philology, Introduction to the
Science of Language, etc.

=Schreiber, Lady Charlotte Elizabeth.= c. 1814-c. 1879. Welsh writer.
Translator of The Mabinogion.

=Scot, Sir Alexander.= fl. c. 1562. Scotch poet. His verse is amatory
in tone. _See edition by David Laing, 1821._ _See Grant Wilson's Poets
of Scotland._

=Scott, John.= 1730-1783. Scotch poet. His productions are flavorless
and poor.

=Scott, Michael.= 1789-1835. Novelist. Author Tom Cringle's Log, etc.

=Scott, Sir Michael.= fl. c. 1250. Scotch philosopher.

=Scott, Robert=. 181 Classical scholar. One of the editors of
Liddell and Scott's Greek Lexicon.

=Scott, Thomas.= 1747-1821. Commentator. Author Bible Commentary, etc.
_Pub. Lip._

=Scott, Sir Walter.= 1771-1832. Scotch novelist and poet. Author of a
long series of romances, beginning with Waverley, in 1814, and ending
with Anne of Geierstein, in 1829. S. first made the novel a really
great power in life as well as in literature. The flow of his
narrative is always animated and infused with a kindly spirit. Guy
Mannering, Ivanhoe, Old Mortality, and Quentin Durward are among the
best of his novels. The Lady of the Lake, Marmion, and Lay of the Last
Minstrel are fine narrative poems, filled with vivid descriptions of
Scotch scenery. _See Taine's Eng. Lit., Masson's Novelists and Their
Styles, and Hutton's Scott, in Eng. Men of Letters._ _See also The
Waverley Dict., by May Rogers._

=Scott, Wm. Bell.= 181 Poet and art writer. Author The Year of
the World, Life of Albert Duerer, etc. _See Grant Wilson's Poets of
Scotland._ _Pub. Rou._

=Scrivener, Frederick Henry.= 181 Biblical scholar. Author of a
Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the New Testament, and editor
of a Greek Testament, The Cambridge Paragraph Bible, etc. _Pub. Ho._

=Sedley, Sir Chas.= 1639-1701. Lyric and dramatic poet. S. wrote the
comedy of The Mulberry Garden. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Seeley, John Robert.= 183 Author Ecce Homo, Lect. and Essays,
Roman Imperialism, etc. Style clear and strong. _See Myers's Essays,
Modern._ _Pub. Mac. Rob._

=Selden, John.= 1584-1654. Antiquarian. Author Titles of Honor, Hist.
of Titles, etc. A man of wide learning, whose Table-Talk is his best
known work. _See Lives, by Wilkins, 1726, Aiken, 1773, and Johnson,
1835._

=Selwyn, Geo. Augustus.= 1809-1878. Bp. Lichfield. Author Tribal
Analysis of the Bible, Are Cathedral Institutions Useless? etc. _Pub.
Mac._

=Senior, Nassau Wm.= 1790-1864. Political economist. Author Lect. on
Population, Essays on Fiction, etc.

=Settle, Elkanah.= 1648-1724. Dramatist. A writer of trifling merit
but the rival of Dryden in his time.

=Seward, Anna.= 1747-1809. Poet. Although called in her day "the Swan
of Lichfield," her verse is weakly sentimental and commonplace.

=Sewell, Elizabeth Missing.= 181 Poet and novelist. Author Amy
Herbert, Margaret Percival, etc. A writer of excellent stories, which
have a strong High Church flavor. _Pub. Apl. Dut. Har. Ho._

=Sewell, Wm.= 1805-1874. Religious writer. Bro. to E. M. S. Author of
Christian Morals, etc.

=Shadwell, Thos.= 1640-1692. Dramatist. Author of 17 plays, but
chiefly remembered as the butt of Dryden's satire MacFlecknoe.

=Shaftesbury, 3d Earl of.= See Cooper, Anthony Ashley.

=Shairp, John Campbell.= 181 Scotch essayist. Author Culture and
Religion, Aspects of Poetry, Studies in Poetry and Philosophy, Poetic
Interpretation of Nature, Burns, in Eng. Men of Letters, etc. _Pub.
Har. Hou._

=Shakespeare, Wm.= 1564-1616. The world's greatest dramatist. Author
of 37 plays, in two of which, Henry VIII. and Two Noble Kinsmen,
Fletcher is supposed to have had a hand. The others are King John,
Richard II., Richard III., the two parts of Henry IV., Henry V., the
three parts of Henry VI., all historical plays; the tragedies, Hamlet,
Macbeth, Othello, Lear, Antony and Cleopatra, Timon of Athens,
Coriolanus, Julius Caesar, Romeo and Juliet, and Troilus and Cressida;
and the comedies, or tragi-comedies, Midsummer Night's Dream, Comedy
of Errors, Love's Labor's Lost, Taming of the Shrew, Two Gentlemen of
Verona, Merchant of Venice, All's Well that Ends Well, Much Ado About
Nothing, As You Like It, Merry Wives of Windsor, Measure for Measure,
Winter's Tale, Tempest, Twelfth Night, Pericles, and Cymbeline. S. was
also the author of the poems Lucrece, Venus and Adonis, and 154
Sonnets. No writings, save the Scriptures, have ever moved the world
like those of Shakespeare, which appeal to every emotion in the mind
of man. He has no equals; there are none with whom he may be compared.
_Among the best complete Am. editions are White's Riverside_, _pub.
Hou._; _Rolfe's_, _pub. Har._; _and Hudson's_, _pub. Gi._ _See also
Furness's Variorum Macbeth, Lear, Hamlet, and Romeo and Juliet_, _pub.
Lip._

=Sharpe, Samuel.= 180 Historian. Author Hist. Egypt, Hist.
Hebrew Nation and Lit., Texts from the Bible Explained by Ancient
Monuments, etc.

=Sheffield, John, Duke of Buckingham.= 1649-1720. Author Essay on
Poetry, a poem in heroic measure, polished and prosaic.

=Sheil [sheel], Richard Lalor.= 1791-1851. Irish dramatist. Author
Evadne, The Apostate, Sketches of the Irish Bar, etc. _See
Biographies, by McNevin, 1845, and McCulloch, 1855._ _Pub. Arm._

=Shelley, Mrs. Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin.= 1797-1851. Novelist. Wife
to P. B. S. Author Frankenstein, a repulsive but powerful romance,
Valperga, Perkin Warbeck, etc.

=Shelley, Percy Bysshe [b[)i]sh].= 1792-1822. Poet. An imaginative
genius of the highest order. Author of Queen Mab, Prometheus Unbound,
Alastor, The Cenci, etc. Some of his best work is seen in the Adonais,
an elegy upon Keats, and the Ode to a Skylark, while all his poems
possess an ethereal beauty quite unlike anything else in literature.
_See Atlantic Monthly, Feb. 1863, Macmillan's Mag. June, 1861, Shelley
and his Writings, by C. S. Middleton, Symonds' Shelley, in Eng. Men.
of Letters, and Swinburne's Essays and Studies._ _Pub. Lit. Mac. Por.
Rou._

=Shenstone, Wm.= 1714-1763. Pastoral poet. Author of The
Schoolmistress, a poem in Spenserian stanza, and of pastoral ballads.
_See Gilfillan's edition of, Edinburgh, 1854._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets,
vol. 3._

=Sheridan, Mrs. Frances.= 1724-1766. Novelist and dramatist. Wife to
T. S.

=Sheridan, Richard Brinsley.= 1751-1816. Irish dramatist. Son to F. S.
and T. S. A sparkling, witty writer. Author of The Duenna, an opera,
The Critic, a farce, and The Rivals and School for Scandal, two of the
best comedies in the Eng. language. _See Works, edited by J. B.
Browne, 1873, and F. Stainforth, 1874; also edition of 1883, with
Introduction, by R. G. White._ _See Life of, by Moore, Atlantic
Monthly, Oct. 1883, and Sheridan, by Mrs. Oliphant, in Eng. Men. of
Letters._ _Pub. Do. Rou._

=Sheridan, Thomas.= 1721-1788. Irish lexicographer. Author Dict. Eng.
Lang., etc.

=Sherlock, Wm.= 1678-1761. Bp. London. Theologian of note.

=Sherwood, Mrs. Mary Martha.= 1775-1851. Writer of an immense number
of religious tales, once very popular. Little Henry and his Bearer is
one of the best known. _See Life, 1874._ _Pub. Ca. Har. Wh._

=Shirley, James.= 1594-1666. Dramatist. The latest of the
Shakespearean dramatists. Better known than any of his 40 plays is the
noble poem Death's Final Conquest. _See Dyce's Life of, 1833, and
Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Shorthouse, Joseph Henry.= 183 Novelist. Author of John
Inglesant and Little Schoolmaster Mark. _Pub. Mac._

=Sidgewick, Henry.= 183 Political economist. Author of The
Principles of Political Economy, The Methods of Ethics, Ethics in
Encyc. Britan., etc. A precise and impartial thinker. _Pub. Mac. Put._

=Sidney, Algernon.= 1622-1683. Political writer. Author Discourses on
Government, etc. _See Life, by Meadley, 1813._

=Sidney= or =Sydney, Sir Philip.= 1554-1586. Poet and prose writer.
Author of Sonnets, the prose romance Arcadia, and The Apologie for
Poetrie, with which latter work literary criticism may be said to
begin. _See Grosart's complete edition, 1877._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets,
vol. 1, Masson's Eng. Novelists, and Life, by Fox-Bourne, 1862._

=Simcox, Geo. Augustus.= 184 Poet and litterateur. Author
Prometheus Unbound, a tragedy, Poems and Romances, and a Hist. of
Latin Lit. _Pub. Har. Rou._

=Simpson, Sir James Young.= 1811-1870. Scotch medical writer of note.
_Pub. Apl. Lip._

=Simpson, Thomas.= 1710-1761. Mathematician. Author of a long series
of mathematical works.

=Simson, Robert.= 1687-1768. Scotch mathematician. Author of a noted
translation of Euclid.

=Sinclair, Mrs. Catherine.= 1800-1864. Scotch novelist. Author of
Beatrice, Modern Society, Jane Bouverie, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Singer, Samuel Weller.= 1783-1868. Shakespearean scholar. His edition
of Shakespeare appeared in 1826.

=Skeat [skeet], Walter Wm.= 183 Philologist. Editor of numerous
Early Eng. and Anglo-Saxon works, and author of an Etymological Dict.
of the Eng. Language. _Pub. Mac._

=Skelton, John.= c. 1460-1529. Poet. Author Why Come Ye Not to Court?
a fierce satire upon Wolsey, Colin Clout, and the Boke of Phyllype
Sparowe. His verse is rugged and harsh, but very powerful. _See Dyce's
edition, 1843, and Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._ _Pub. Hou._

=Skene, Wm. Forbes.= 180 Antiquarian. Author The Highlanders of
Scotland, Chronicles of the Picts and Scots, etc.

=Sketchley, Arthur.= See Rose, Geo.

=Skinner, John.= 1721-1807. Scotch poet. Tullochgorum is his most
noted poem. _See Poems of, with Memoir, 1859._

=Smart, Benj. Humphrey.= c. 1785-1872. Lexicographer. The chief of his
numerous works is a Pronouncing Dict., which first appeared in 1836.

=Smart, Christopher.= 1722-1770. Poet. Author of a noted satire called
The Hilliad and the famous Song to David. _See edition 1791._

=Smart, Hawley.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Author Breezie Langton, Bound to
Win, etc. _Pub. Apl._

=Smedley, Edward.= 1789-1836. Historian. Author Religio Clerici, Hist.
Reformed Religion in France, Hist. France, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Smedley, Francis Edward.= 1819-1865. Novelist. Author Frank
Fairleigh, Harry Coverdale's Courtship, etc. _Pub. Pet. Rou._

=Smedley, Menella Bute.= c. 1825-c. 1875. Poet. Sister to F. E. S.
Author of Nina, Twice Lost, and other prose tales. One of the finest
of her poems is The Little Fair Soul. _Pub. Rou._

=Smee, Alfred.= 181 Scientific writer of note. _Pub. Put._

=Smiles, Samuel.= 181 Scotch writer. Author Self Help, Thrift,
Life of a Scotch Naturalist, Life of Geo. Stephenson, etc. _Pub. Har.
Lip. Rou._

=Smith, Adam.= 1723-1790. Political economist. Author of The Wealth of
Nations, the theory of which is that labor is the source of wealth.
_See Lives by Brougham, Playfair, and Smellie._ _Pub. Mac. Put._

=Smith, Albert Richard.= 1816-1860. Novelist. Author Christopher
Tadpole, etc.

=Smith, Alexander.= 1830-1867. Scotch poet and essayist. Author Edwin
of Deira, Life Drama, City Poems, etc. His verse achieved a sudden but
brief popularity. It is brilliant, but uneven. His prose, of which A
Summer in Skye is the best example, is excellent. _See Life, by
Alexander, 1868, and Stedman's Victorian Poets._

=Smith, Mrs. Charlotte.= 1749-1806. Poet and novelist. Elegiac Sonnets
are her principal poems, and The Old Manor House is her best novel.

=Smith, George.= c. 1825-1876. Orientalist. Author of The Chaldean
Account of Genesis, Assyrian Discoveries, Records of the Past, etc.
_Pub. Scr._

=Smith, Goldwin.= 182 Miscellaneous writer. Author Lect. and
Essays, The Study of Hist., Three Eng. Statesmen, etc. _Pub. Har.
Mac._

=Smith, Horace.= 1779-1849. Poet and novelist. Author of the noted
poem Address to a Mummy, of five of the Rejected Addresses published
by Horace and James Smith, and of several novels,--The Moneyed Man,
Brambletye House, etc. _Pub. Har. Ho. Put._

=Smith, Isaac Gregory.= 182 Religious writer. Author
Characteristics of Christian Morality, etc. _Pub. Dut._

=Smith, James.= 1775-1839. Poet and critic. Bro. to H. S. Author of
five of the travesties in Rejected Addresses, viz., those on
Wordsworth, Cobbett, Southey, Coleridge, and Crabbe. _See Memoirs of,
by Horace Smith, 1840._ _Pub. Ho. Put._

=Smith, James.= 182 Scotch poet and novelist.

=Smith, John Pye.= 1775-1851. Theologian. Author Letters to Belsham,
etc.

=Smith, Robert Payne.= 181 Religious writer. Author Bampton
Lect., 1869, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Smith, Sarah=, "Hesba Stretton." 18-- ----. Novelist. Author Bede's
Charity, Through A Needle's Eye, and other excellent novels. _Pub. Do.
Rou._

=Smith, Sydney.= 1771-1845. Essayist and humorist. Author of the
Plymley Letters, etc. A perfect master of an intensely amusing and
sarcastic style of reasoning. _See Duyckinck's Wit and Wisdom of
Sydney Smith._ _Pub. Apl. Har. Rou._

=Smith, Thos. Southwood.= 1788-1861. Medical writer of note. Author
Philosophy of Health, The use of the Dead to the Living, etc. _Pub.
Clx. Lip._

=Smith, Wm.= 1769-1839. Geological writer of eminence. _See Life, by
Phillips, 1844._

=Smith, Wm.= 181 Classical lexicographer. Author Dict. Greek and
Roman Antiquities, Dict. of the Bible, etc. _Pub. Apl. Est. Har. Hou.
Lit. Por._

=Smith, Wm. Robertson.= 184 Scotch theologian of note. Author of
The Old Testament in the Jewish Church, etc. _Pub. Apl._

=Smollett, Tobias George.= 1721-1771. Author of Roderick Random;
Peregrine Pickle, Count Fathom, Humphrey Clinker, etc., novels whose
coarseness is scarcely atoned for by their wit and vivacity. _See
Complete Works, 1872._ _See Thackeray's Eng. Humorists and Masson's
Novelists and Their Styles._ _Pub. Har. Rou._

=Smyth, Chas. Piazzi.= c. 182 Egyptologist. Son to W. H. S.
Author Our Inheritance in the Gt. Pyramid, Life and Work at the Gt.
Pyramid, etc. An ingenious but somewhat fanciful thinker. _Pub. Est.
Rou. Scr._

=Smyth, Wm. Henry.= 1788-1865. Hydrographer. Author of a noted work on
the physical geography of the Mediterranean. _Pub. Mac._

=Smythe, Geo. Sydney, Viscount Strangford.= 1818-1857. Novelist.
Author of Historic Fancies and Angela Pisani.

=Somers, Lord John.= 1651-1716. Jurist. Author of the noted "Somers
Tracts." _See Walter Scott's edition, 13 vols. 4to, 1815._ _See
Campbell's Lives of the Chancellors._

=Somerville, Mrs. Mary.= 1780-1872. Scotch astronomer. Author
Mechanism of the Heavens, Connection of the Physical Sciences,
Physical Geography, etc. _See Personal Recollections, by Mrs.
Somerville, 1873._ _Pub. Har. Rob. Sh._

=Somerville, Wm.= 1682-1742. Poet. Author of The Chase, etc. _See
Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._

=Sotheby [s[)u]th'[e^]-b[)i]], Wm.= 1757-1833. A fine translation of
Wieland's Oberon is his best known work.

=South, Robert.= 1633-1716. A witty theologian, whose Sermons possess
vitality and are still read. _Pub. Dut. Hou._

=Southern [s[)u]th'ern], Thos.= 1660-1746. Irish dramatist. Author
Oroonoko, The Fatal Dowry, etc. His plays were once very popular and
show great power.

=Southey [sowth'[)i]], Mrs. Caroline Anne [Bowles].= 1787-1854. Poet.
Wife to R. S. Author of The Young Gray Head, The Pauper's Death Bed,
etc. Style harmonious and pathetic. _Pub. Rou._

=Southey, Robert.= 1774-1843. Poet and essayist. Author of Thalaba,
Curse of Kehama, Roderick, Madoc, etc. As a whole his verse is a good
deal like prose, but prose of an excellent quality. The Doctor is one
of his most noted prose works. _See Life, by C. T. Browne, and
Dowden's Southey, in Eng. Men of Letters._ _Pub. Apl. Har. Hou. Rou._

=Southwell, Robert.= 1560-1595. Poet. Content and Rich and Times go by
Turns are among his best poems. His verse has much quiet beauty. _See
MacDonald's England's Antiphon and Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=Spedding, James.= 1808-1881. Baconian scholar. Editor Lord Bacon's
works, author Life and Letters of Bacon, Reviews and Discussions,
Evenings with a Reviewer, etc. _Pub. Hou._

=Speed, John.= 1552-1629. Antiquary. Hist. Great Britain, etc.

=Spelman, Sir Henry.= 1562-1641. Antiquary. Author Hist. Eng.
Councils, Glossarium Archaeologicum, etc.

=Spencer, Herbert.= 182 Philosopher. Author Social Statics,
Principles of Psychology, Study of Sociology, Education, Descriptive
Sociology, etc. _Pub. Apl._

=Spencer, Wm. Robert.= 1770-1834. Poet. Beth-Gelert is his best known
poem.

=Spenser, Edmund.= 1552-1599. Poet. Shepherd's Calendar, Mother
Hubbard's Tale, Amoretti, Epithalamion, and Prothalamion are the best
of his minor poems. The Faerie Queene, an allegory in 6 books, is his
greatest work, the interest of which lies not in the poem as a
narration, but in its symbolic representation of the soul at war with
evil. _See Todd's Variorum edition, and editions by Payne Collier,
1862, and Morris, 1869._ _See Craik's Spenser and his Poetry, Morley's
Library Eng. Lit., and Church's Spenser, in Eng. Men of Letters._
_Pub. Mac. Hou._

=Spottswood= or =Spottiswoode, John=. 1565-1639. Abp. St. Andrew's.
Ecclesiastical historian. Author Hist. Church of Scotland, etc. _See
Russell's edition, 1851._

=Sprat, Thos.= 1636-1713. Bp. Rochester. Theologian. Author Hist.
Royal Society, Life of Cowley, Poems, Sermons, etc.

=Spurgeon, Chas. Haddon.= 183 Author several vols. of Sermons,
John Ploughman's Talks, etc. _Pub. Ca. Scr. Sh._

=Stanhope, Philip Dormer, Earl of Chesterfield.= 1694-1773. Author of
the celebrated Letters to his Son, Philip Stanhope, the morality of
which has been much debated. Style polished and able.

=Stanhope, Philip Henry, Lord Mahon.= 1805-1875. Author Hist. of
England, Hist. War of the Spanish Succession, etc. _Pub. Lit._

=Stanley, Arthur Penrhyn.= 1815-1881. Theologian. Author Lect. on the
Jewish Church, Lect. on the Eastern Church, Christian Institutions,
Life of Dr. Arnold, etc. A writer of much vigor and strength, whose
wide sympathies are clearly shown in his works. _See Century Mag. Jan.
1883, and Myers's Essays Modern._ _Pub. Arm. Dut. Har. Mac. Scr._

=Stanley, Thomas.= 1625-1678. Poet. Beside a vol. of quaint verse S.
wrote a Hist. of Philosophy.

=Staunton [staen't[o^]n], Howard.= 1810-1874. Shakespearean scholar.
His library edition of Shakespeare appeared in 1863. _Pub. Rou._

=Steele, Sir Richard.= 1671-1729. Essayist. S. began the periodical
Essay by The Tatler in 1709, and wrote afterwards with Addison in The
Spectator and The Guardian. Author also of The Christian Hero. _See
Thackeray's Eng. Humorists._

=Steevens, George.= 1736-1800. Shakespearean scholar. S. edited with
Dr. Johnson the edition of 1773, and with Isaac Reed those of 1785 and
1793.

=Stephen, Sir James.= 1789-1859. Historian and essayist. Author Essays
in Eccl. Biography, Lect. on Hist. of France, etc. _See Life, by his
son, 1860._ _Pub. Har._

=Stephen, Sir James Fitzjames.= 182 Jurist. Son to preceding.
Author General View of the Criminal Law of England, Essays by a
Barrister, etc. _Pub. Mac. Th._

=Stephen, Leslie.= 183 Litterateur. Neph. to Sir J. S. Author of
a brilliant Hist. Eng., Thought in the Eighteenth Cent., Science of
Ethics, Hours in a Library, and Pope, Johnson, and Swift, in Eng. Men
of Letters. _Pub. Har. Scr._

=Stephenson, Mrs. Eliza [Tabor].= 183 Novelist. Author St.
Olave's, Jeanie's Quiet Life, The Blue Ribbon, Meta's Faith, The
Senior Songman, etc. St. Olave's, her best work, has been very
popular. _Pub. Har._

=Sterling, John.= 1806-1844. Poet and critic. _See Lives, by Hare,
1848, T. Carlyle, 1851; also, Caroline Fox's Memories of Old Friends._

=Sterne, Lawrence.= 1713-1768. Humorist. Author of Tristram Shandy and
The Sentimental Journey, two rambling, fantastic books, with a slender
thread of story in each. The quaintness is affected, and the humor
sometimes obscure, but the character drawing is inimitable. _See Life,
by Fitzgerald, Taine's Eng. Lit., Masson's Eng. Novelists and Their
Styles, and H. D. Traill's Sterne, in Eng. Men of Letters._ _Pub. Clx.
Lip. Rou._

=Sternhold, Thos.= c. 1500-1549. Associate with Hopkins in a metrical
version of the Psalms.

=Stevenson, John Hall.= 1718-1785. Poet. Author Crazy Hall Tales, etc.

=Stevenson, Robert Louis.= 18-- ----. Author of Travels with a Donkey
in the Cevennes, An Inland Voyage, The New Arabian Nights, etc. _Pub.
Rob._

=Stewart, Dugald.= 1753-1828. Scotch metaphysician. Author
Philosophical Essays, Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers, etc.

=Still, John.= 1543-1607. Bp. Bath and Wells. To him has been
doubtfully attributed the comedy Gammer Gurton's Needle, one of the
very earliest English plays. _See Dodsley's Old Plays._

=Stillingfleet, Edward.= 1635-1699. Bp. Worcester. Controversial
writer of note. _Pub. Mac._

=Stirling, Earl of.= See Alexander, Wm.

=Stirling, Sir Wm. Maxwell.= See Maxwell Stirling.

=Stormonth, James.= 1825-1882. Scotch lexicographer. Author Dict. of
Scientific Terms, Etymological Dict., etc.

=Stoughton, John.= 18-- ----. Religious historian. Author Hist. of
Religion in England from the Opening of the Long Parliament to the End
of the Eighteenth Cent., and Introduction to Historical Theology.
_Pub. Arm. Phi._

=Stow, John.= 1525-1605. Chronicler.

=Strangford, Viscount.= See Smythe, G. S.

=Street, Geo. Edmund.= 1824-1881. Gothic architect. Author The Brick
and Marble in the Middle Ages, Gothic Architecture in Spain, etc. _See
The Biograph, Aug. 1880._

=Stretton, Hesba.= See Smith, Sarah.

=Strickland, Agnes.= 1796-1874. Historical writer. Author Lives of the
Queens of England, Lives of the Queens of Scotland, Lives of the Seven
Bishops, etc. _Pub. Har. La. Lip. Por._

=Strutt, Joseph.= 1742-1802. Antiquarian. Author Sports and Pastimes
of the People of England, Biographical Hist. of Engravers, etc. _Pub.
Rou._

=Strype, John.= 1643-1737. Historian. Author Annals of the
Reformation, Life of Cranmer, etc.

=Stuart, Gilbert.= 1742-1786. Historian. Author View of Society in
Europe, Hist. of Scotland, etc. An accurate but prejudiced writer.

=Stubbs, Wm.= 182 Historian. Author of The Constitutional Hist.
of England, The Early Plantagenets, etc. _Pub. Est. Mac._

=Stukely, Wm.= 1687-1765. Antiquarian writer.

=Suckling, Sir John.= 1609-1641. Of his gay, airy verse, the Ballad
upon a Wedding is most widely known. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Sugden, Edward B., Baron St. Leonards.= 1781-1875. Jurist of high
rank. Author Handy Book on Property Law, etc. _Pub. Jo._

=Sumner, John Bird.= 1780-1862. Abp. Canterbury. Religious writer.
Author Practical Reflections, etc.

=Surrey, Earl of.= See Howard, Henry.

=Swain, Charles.= 1803-1874. Poet. His verse is pleasing, but has
little strength. _Pub. Rob._

=Swift, Jonathan.= 1667-1745. Irish satirist. Author Battle of the
Books, Tale of a Tub, Drapier's Letters, Gulliver's Travels, etc.
Style coarse, bitterly savage and personal, but of great vigor,
keenness, and force. _See Lives, by T. Sheridan and Forster; also,
Taine's Eng. Lit., Thackeray's Eng. Humorists, Leslie Stephen's Swift,
in Eng. Men of Letters, and Masson's Novelists._ _Pub. Hou._

=Swinburne, Algernon Charles.= 183 Poet and critic. Author of
Atalanta in Calydon, Song of Italy, Chastelard, Mary Stuart, Bothwell,
Tristram, etc. Tristram is the finest of his long poems, and A Child's
Song in Winter one of the best of the minor ones. His verse shows
wonderful melody and perfect mastery of metre even when most obscure,
and abounds in vivid and exquisite descriptions. _See Stedman's
Victorian Poets and Lowell's My Study Windows._ _Pub. Ho._

=Sylvester, Joshua.= 1563-1618. Poet. Translator of the French poet Du
Bartas, and known in his day as Silver-Tongued Sylvester.

=Symonds, John Addington.= 184 Poet and critic. Author Hist. of
the Renaissance in Italy, Studies of the Greek Poets, Sketches and
Studies in Southern Europe, Italian Byways, etc., and two vols. of
poems, entitled New and Old and Many Moods. _Pub. Har. Ho. Os._




=Tabor, Eliza.= See Stephenson, Mrs.

=Tait, Archibald Campbell.= 1811-1882. Abp. Canterbury. Theologian.
Author Dangers and Safeguards of Modern Theology, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Talfourd [tawl'furd], Sir Thomas Noon.= 1795-1854. Dramatic poet.
Author of The Athenian Captive, Glencoe, The Castilian, etc., but
chiefly known by his fine tragedy Ion, and Final Memorials of Chas.
Lamb.

=Tannahill, Robert.= 1774-1810. Scotch poet. His lyrics possess a
sweetness like those of Burns. Braes of Balquither and The Flower of
Dumblane are familiar examples. _See Centenary edition, 1874._

=Tate, Nahum.= 1652-1715. Associate with Brady in a noted metrical
version of the Psalms, and author of several plays.

=Tautphoeus, Baroness.= 18-- ----. Novelist. Author of The Initials,
Quits, Cyrilla, At Odds, etc. _Pub. Ho. Lip._

=Taylor, Brook.= 1685-1731. Mathematician. Author Methods of Increment
and inventor of Taylor's Theorem.

=Taylor, Sir Henry.= 180 Dramatic poet. Author Edwin the Fair,
Philip Van Artavelde, Isaac Comnenus, etc. Philip Van Artavelde, his
finest work, ranks high in modern dramatic poetry. _See edition 1863._
_See Fortnightly Review, vol. 1, and The Biograph, vol. 2._ _Pub.
Lip._

=Taylor, Isaac.= 1787-1865. Miscellaneous writer. Author Elements of
Thought, The Spirit of Hebrew Poetry, The World of Mind, etc. _Pub.
Ca. Dut. Har. Mac._

=Taylor, Jane.= 1783-1824. Moral and religious writer. Sister to I. T.
Author with her sister Ann of Hymns for Infant Minds, etc. _Pub. Ca.
Har. Por. Rou._

=Taylor, Jeremy.= 1613-1667. Bp. Down and Connor. Theologian. His best
works are Sermons, The Great Exemplar, and Holy Living and Holy
Dying. His warmth of imagination and poetic fervor render his prose
both musical and eloquent, while his long, involved sentences are
managed with the rarest skill. _See Heber's edition, 15 vols., 1820._
_See Life, by Wilmott, 1847._ _Pub. Ca. Clx. Dut. Lip._

=Taylor, John.= 1580-1654. Poet. Called the Water Poet. A voluminous
writer but one of little interest to modern readers.

=Taylor, Robert.= fl. c. 1600. Dramatist. Author of The Hog hath Lost
his Pearl, etc.

=Taylor, Thomas.= 1758-1835. Philosophical writer. Known as the
Platonist.

=Taylor, Tom.= 1817-1880. Dramatist. Of his many excellent plays, The
Ticket-of-Leave Man is the most popular. _See Eclectic Mag. Oct.
1880._

=Taylor, Wm.= 1765-1836. His translations of Goethe, Schiller, and
Lessing promoted greatly the study of German literature in England.

=Temple, Frederick.= 182 Bp. Exeter. Theologian of the Broad
Church school. Author Sermons in Rugby School, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Temple, Sir Wm.= 1628-1699. Philosophical essayist. _The best edition
of his works is 4 vols. 8vo, London, 1814._

=Tennant, Wm.= 1774-1848. Scotch poet. Author of the humorous,
mock-heroic poem, Auster Fair, etc. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4._

=Tennent, Sir James.= See Emerson-Tennent.

=Tennyson, Alfred.= 180 Poet Laureate. In Memoriam, Idyls of the
King, The Princess, Maud, and Enoch Arden, with the dramas Harold and
Queen Mary, comprise his longest poems. Among the finest of the
shorter ones are [OE]none, Ulysses, The Talking Oak, Lotus Eaters,
Lady of Shalott, The Gardener's Daughter, The Revenge, and Locksley
Hall, and of the brief songs, Tears, Idle Tears, and Late, so Late.
The poetry of T., taken as a whole, represents the highest water mark
of the non-dramatic poetry of the English-speaking world. In it is
united a perfect mastery of words and metre with a widely cultured,
thoughtful imagination. _See Hutton's Essays, Stedman's Victorian
Poets, Buchanan's Master Spirits, Tavish's Studies in Tennyson,
Gatty's Study of In Memoriam, Genung's Study of In Memoriam, Atlantic
Monthly, Sept. 1879._ _Pub. Har. Hou. Os._

=Tennyson-Turner, Chas.= 1808?-1881. Poet. Bro. to A. Tennyson. Style
delicate and meditative. His Sonnets have been greatly praised. _See
Living Age, Dec. 31, 1881._

=Tennyson, Frederick.= 180 Poet. Bro. to two preceding. Author
Days and Hours, etc. Style artistic and elegant. The Blackbird is one
of his best poems. _See Stedman's Victorian Poets._

=Thackeray-Ritchie, Mrs. Anne Isabella.= 184 Dau. to W. M. T.
Novelist. Author of Miss Angel, Old Kensington, Village on the Cliff,
etc. Style quiet, picturesque, and refined. _Pub. Har._

=Thackeray, Wm. Makepeace.= 1811-1863. Novelist. Author of Vanity
Fair, Newcomes, Pendennis, Virginians, Henry Esmond, Philip, Denis
Duval, Hoggarty Diamond, Barry Lyndon, etc. Of these Esmond must rank
highest as a piece of literary art. His style presents a union of the
satirical and the humorous, the cynical and the kindly, which
perplexes some readers, but is almost always an example of excellent
English. The End of the Play and Bouillebaisse are his two best poems.
_See_ _Hannay's Studies on Thackeray in Every Saturday, vol. 6, Old
Series, Shepard's Pen Pictures of Modern Authors, Rideing's Stray
Moments with Thackeray, and Taylor's Thackeray the Humorist._ _Pub.
Har. Ho. Lip._

=Theobald [thee-o-bawld, or t[)i]b'bald], Lewis.= 1688-1744. Dramatist
and Shakespearean editor. His edition of Shakespeare appeared in 1733,
and is of great merit. T. was savagely and unjustly satirized by Pope
in the Dunciad.

=Thirlwall, Connop.= 1797-1875. Bp. St. David's. Historian. Author of
a valuable Hist. of Greece _Pub. Har. Rob._

=Thomas, Annie.= See Cudlip, Mrs. Pender.

=Thoms, Wm. John.= 180 Antiquarian writer.

=Thomson, James.= 1700-1748. Scotch poet. Author of The Seasons,
Castle of Indolence, etc. His style is somewhat heavy, but his feeling
for nature is genuine and his descriptions are fine. _See Lives, by
Buchan, Gilfillan, and Bell; also, Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._ _Pub.
Apl. Clx. Hou._

=Thomson, James. 1834-1882. Scotch poet. Author of a sombre but=
striking poem, The City of Dreadful Night. _See To-day, July, 1883,
and Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4, 2d edition._

=Thomson, Mrs. Katharine.= 1800-1862. Historical writer.

=Thomson, Wm.= 181 Abp. York. Religious writer.

=Thornbury, Geo. Walter.= 1828-1876. Novelist and poet. Author Life of
Turner, True as Steel, Greatheart, etc. Culloden and The Jester's
Sermon are among his best poems. Style spirited and strong. _See
Stedman's Victorian Poets._ _Pub. Ho._

=Thornton, Bonnell.= 1724-1768. Dramatist and translator.

=Thornton, Wm. Thomas.= 181 Political economist. Author
Over-Population and its Remedy, Plea for Peasant Proprietors, On
Labor, Old-Fashioned Ethics and Common-Sense Metaphysics, Poems, etc.
_Pub. Mac._

=Thorold, Anthony Wilson.= 18-- ----. Bp. Rochester. Religious writer.
Author The Presence of Christ, The Threshold of Private Devotions,
etc. _Pub. Ran._

=Thrale, Mrs.= See Piozzi, Mrs.

=Thurlow, Lord Edward Hovell.= 1781-1829. Poet. Author Ariadne, etc.

=Tickell, Richard.= ---- 1793. Humorist. Author of The Anticipation, an
amusing forecast of the debates in the Parliament of 1778.

=Tickell, Thomas.= 1686-1740. Poet and essayist. Grandfather to R. T.
Author of a fine elegy upon Addison, the ballad of Colin and Lucy,
several papers in the Spectator, etc. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._
_Pub Hou._

=Tighe [t[=i]], Mrs. Mary Blackford.= 1773-1810. Irish poet. Subject
of Moore's poem "I saw thy form in youthful prime," and author of
Psyche, a highly imaginative poem in Spenserian stanza.

=Tillotson, John.= 1630-1694. Abp. Cant. His Sermons, still
occasionally read, are sedate and solid in style.

=Timbs, John.= 1801-1875. Miscellaneous writer. Author
Anecdote-Biography, Curiosities of London, Club Life in London, etc.
_Pub. Har. Rou._

=Tindal, Matthew.= 1657-1733. Religious controversial writer.

=Tobin, John.= 1770-1804. Dramatist. Author, among other plays, of the
romantic, popular comedy The Honeymoon. _See Memoirs, by E. S. Benger,
1820._

=Todd, Henry John.= 1763-1845. Litterateur. Author Life of Cranmer,
Account of the Deans of Canterbury, etc., and editor of Spenser,
Milton, and Johnson's Dict.

=Tonna, Mrs. Charlotte Elizabeth= [Brown]. 1792-1846. Writer of moral
and religious tales. Known as an author by her signature Charlotte
Elizabeth.

=Tooke, John Horne.= See Horne-Tooke.

=Toplady, Augustus Montague.= 1740-1778. Theologian and hymn writer.
Chiefly known by the famous hymn Rock of Ages. _See Works, 1869._

=Tourneur, Cyril.= fl. c. 1600. Dramatist. Author The Atheist's
Tragedy, Revenger's Tragedy, etc. His plays show great power and
dramatic skill.

=Townley, James.= 1715-1788. Dramatist. Author of the witty farce High
Life Below Stairs, etc.

=Townshend [townz'end], Chauncey Hare.= 1798-1868. Poet and prose
writer. Author Sermons in Sonnets, Facts in Mesmerism, Mesmerism
Proved, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Trafford, F. G.= See Riddell, Mrs. C. E.

=Tregelles, Samuel Prideaux.= 1813-1875. Biblical scholar of note.
Author The Englishman's Greek Concordance to the New Testament, etc.

=Trelawney, Edward John.= 1792-1881. Novelist. Author Adventures of a
Younger Son, Recollections of the Last Days of Shelley and Byron, etc.

=Trench, Richard Chenevix.= 180 Abp. Dublin. Poet, philologist,
and theologian. Author Notes on the Miracles, Study of Words, English
Past and Present, Poems, etc. _See Myers's Essays Modern._ _Pub. Apl.
Arm. Mac. Scr._

=Trevelyan, George Otto.= 183 Miscellaneous writer. Author
Cawnpore, Life of Macaulay, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Trimmer, Mrs. Sarah.= 1741-1810. Miscellaneous writer. Author
Fabulous Histories, Abridgments of Scripture Hist., Sermons for Family
Reading, etc. _Pub. Rou._

=Trollope, Anthony.= 1815-1882. Novelist. Son to F. M. T. Author of a
very long list of excellent novels, the best of which are, He Knew he
was Right, Barchester Towers, Marion Fay, Doctor Thorne, and Framley
Parsonage. His stories are never dull; the current of the narrative
flows easily and the characters are well sketched, but the English is
sometimes a little careless. _See Autobiography; also, Blackwood's
Mag. Feb. 1883, Century Mag. July, 1883, and Princeton Review, July,
1883._ _Pub. Har. Lip. Mac. Pet. Por. Rou._

=Trollope, Edward.= 181 Bp. Nottingham. Archaeological and
architectural writer of note. Cousin to A. T. and T. A. T.

=Trollope, Mrs. Frances Eleanor= [Tiernan]. 18-- ----. Novelist. Wife
to T. A. T. Author of Aunt Margaret's Trouble, Anne Furness, Among
Aliens, Mabel's Progress, The Sacristan's Household, Veronica, etc.
_Pub. Har._

=Trollope, Mrs. Frances= [Milton]. 1778-1863. Novelist. Author
Domestic Manners among the Americans, Widow Barnaby, etc. A
voluminous, witty, but inartistic writer. _Pub. Har. Rou._

=Trollope, Thomas Adolphus.= 181 Novelist and historian. Son to
F. M. T. Author Lindisfarne Chase, Filippo Strozzi, La Beata, Hist.
Florentine Commonwealth, Life Pope Pius IX., The Papal Conclaves, etc.
_See "Eng. Authors in Florence," Atlantic Monthly, Dec. 1864._ _Pub.
Har. Mac. Pet._

=Tucker, Abraham.= 1705-1774. Metaphysician. Author of The Light of
Nature Pursued, published under the pseudonym Edward Search.

=Tucker, Charlotte.= "A. L. O. E." 183 Writer of religious
juvenile fiction. _Pub. Ca. Nel._

=Tulloch, John.= 182 Scotch theologian. Author Theism, Leaders
of the Reformation, Christ of the Gospels and Christ of Modern
Criticism, etc. _See The Biograph, vol. 3._ _Pub. Mac. Phi. Rou. Scr._

=Tupper, Martin Farquhar.= 181 Poet and prose writer. Author of
The Proverbial Philosophy, and other popular but exceedingly
commonplace poems. Some of his prose tales are excellent; of these
Crock of Gold is the best known. _Pub. Arm. Pet._

=Turberville, George.= 1530-c. 1595. Poet. Author Tragical Tales, etc.

=Turner, Chas. Tennyson.= See Tennyson-Turner.

=Turner, Dawson.= 1775-1858. Author Nat. Hist. of Sea Weeds, etc.

=Turner, Sharon.= 1768-1847. Historian. His chief works are Hist. of
England in the Middle Ages, Sacred Hist. of the World, and a valuable
Hist. of the Anglo-Saxons. _Pub. Har._

=Tusser, Thomas.= 1515-1580. Poet. Author of A Hondreth Good Points of
Husbandrie, expanded by later writers into Five Hundred Points of Good
Husbandrie. _See Mavor's edition, 1812._

=Tylor, Edward Burnett.= 183 Ethnologist. Author of Anahauc, or
Mexico and the Mexicans, Researches into the Early Hist. of Mankind,
Anthropology and Primitive Culture. A writer of thorough scientific
knowledge, possessing an admirable style. _Pub. Apl. Ho._

=Tyndale= or =Tindal, Wm.= 1477-1536. Translator of the New
Testament, 1525. Tyndale's version was afterwards revised by
Coverdale. _See Offor's Life of, 1836._

=Tyndall, John.= 182 Irish physicist. Author Glaciers of the
Alps, Heat as a Mode of Motion, Lect. on Light, On Radiation, etc.
_Pub. Apl._

=Tyrwhitt [t[)e]r'[)i]t], Thomas.= 1730-1786. Antiquary and Chaucerian
scholar. Editor of the works of Chaucer and Chatterton. A scholar of
singular insight, whose conjectures have nearly all been sustained by
texts of which he knew nothing.

=Tytler [t[=i]t'l[e^]r], Alex Fraser, Lord Woodhouselee.= 1747-1813.
Scotch historian. Son to Wm. T. Author Elements of Gen. Hist., Essay
on Military Law, etc. _Pub Clx. Har._

=Tytler, C. C. Fraser.= Great-niece to P. F. T. See Liddell, Mrs.

=Tytler, Patrick Fraser.= 1791-1849. Scotch historian and biographer.
Son to A. F. T. Author Scottish Worthies, etc., and a standard Hist.
of Scotland. _Pub. Har._

=Tytler, Sarah.= See Keddie, Henrietta.

=Tytler, Wm.= 1711-1792. Scotch historical and critical writer.




=Udall [yoo'd[)a]l], Nicholas.= 1506-1556. Dramatist. Author Ralph
Roister Doister, the first Eng. comedy. It is known to have been acted
before 1551. _See Arber's reprint._

=Upcott, Wm.= 1779-1845. Bibliographer of note.

=Urquhart [[^u]rk'[a^]rt], David.= 180 Scotch writer. Author
Turkey and its Resources, The Progress of Russia, the Pillars of
Hercules, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Usher or Ussher, James.= 1580-1656. Abp. Armagh. Chronologist.
Author Chronological Tables of Universal Hist. from the Creation to
Vespasian. The marginal dates in the authorized version of the Bible
are from Usher. _See Complete Works, 17 vols., Dublin, 1864._ _See
Life, by Aikin._




=Valpy, Abraham John.= 1787-1854. Shakespearean editor. His
illustrated Shakespeare, 15 vols., appeared in 1834.

=Vanbrugh [v[)a]n'broo], Sir John.= 1666-1726. Dramatist and
architect. Author of a dozen brilliant but coarse comedies, among
which The Relapse, Revoked Wife, The Confederacy, and Journey to
London are the best.

=Vaughan [vawn or vaw'[a^]n], Chas. James.= 181 Theologian.
Author Heroes of Faith, Epistles of St. Paul for Eng. Readers, etc. A
leader of Broad Church thought. _Pub. Dut. Mac. Phi. Rou._

=Vaughan, Henry.= 1621-1695. Poet. His verse is religious in
character, and is as frequently harsh in sound as quaint in form.
Silex Scintillans is the title of his principal work. _See Ward's Eng.
Poets, vol. 2, MacDonald's England's Antiphon, and Dr. John Brown's
Spare Hours, 1st Series._ _Pub. Hou._

=Vaughan, Robert.= 1795-1868. Miscellaneous writer. Author of
Congregationalism, the Age of Great Cities, Revolutions in English
Hist., etc.

=Vaughan, Robert Alfred.= 1823-1855. Son to R. V. Author Hours with
the Mystics, etc. _See Memoir by his father, 1858._

=Vaux [vawks], Thomas, Lord.= 1510-1557. Poet. Author of the
Grave-digger's song in Hamlet and the meditative poem Thought.

=Veitch, John.= 182 Scotch philosophical writer. Author Memoirs
of Dugald Stewart and Sir Wm. Hamilton, etc.

=Venn, Henry.= 1725-1797. Religious writer. Author Complete Duty of
Man, etc. _See Life, by Henry Venn, 1834._

=Vere, De, Sir Aubrey.= See De Vere, Sir Aubrey.

=Vere, De, Aubrey Thomas.= See De Vere, Aubrey.

=Vere, De, Edward, Earl of Oxford.= See De Vere, Edward.

=Villiers, George, Duke of Buckingham.= 1627-1688. Dramatist. Author
The Rehearsal and Battle of Sedgemoor.

=Viner [v[=i]'n[e^]r], Chas.= 1680-1756. Legal writer. Author Complete
Abridgment of Law and Equity.




=Wace, Maistre Richard.= c. 1120-1184. Anglo-Norman poet. Author of
the Brut d'Angleterre and the Roman de Rou: the first poem of 12,000
lines, the latter of 17,000.

=Waddington, George.= 1793-1869. Historian. Author Hist. of the
Church, Hist. Reformation on the Continent, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Wakefield, Gilbert.= 1756-1801. Theological and classical writer. His
annotated edition of Lucretius is one of his chief works.

=Wakefield, Mrs. Priscilla.= 1751-1832. Miscellaneous writer.

=Walcott, Mackenzie Edward Chas.= 182 Archaeologist. Author
Sacred Archaeology. Cathedral Cities of England and Wales, Memorials of
Canterbury, etc.

=Walford, Edward.= 182 Litterateur. Author Handbook of the Greek
Drama, etc. _See The Biograph, vol. 1._

=Walford, Mrs. Lucy Bethia= [Colquhoun]. 184 Novelist. Author
Mr. Smith, Pauline, Cousins, Troublesome Daughters, Dick Netherby,
etc. _Pub. Ho._

=Walker, John.= 1732-1807. Lexicographer. His Dict. of the English
Language appeared in 1775.

=Wallace, Alfred Russel.= 182 Naturalist. Author Travels on the
Amazon, The Malay Archipelago, Geographical Distribution of Animals,
etc. Independently of Darwin, W. originated a theory of natural
selection. _Pub. Har. Mac._

=Wallace, Donald Mackenzie.= 184 Traveler. Author of Russia,
etc. _Pub. Ho._

=Waller, Edmund.= 1605-1687. Poet. Go, Lovely Rose, On a Girdle, and
Old Age and Death are some of his best poems. _See Bell's edition,
1866._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Waller, John Francis.= 181 Poet and prose writer. Author Poems,
The Slingsby Papers, etc., and editor of the Imperial Dict. of
Universal Biography. _Pub. Cas._

=Wallis, John.= 1616-1703. Mathematician. Author numerous works on
algebra, geometry, etc.

=Walpole [w[)o]l'pol], Horace.= 1717-1797. Miscellaneous writer.
Author Castle of Otranto, a sensational romance, The Mysterious
Mother, a tragedy, Historic Doubts concerning Richard III., etc. A
brilliant but superficial writer. _See Memoirs of, 1851; also, Living
Age, vol. 13, "Strawberry Hill."_

=Walter, John.= 1739-1812. Journalist. Founder of the London Times,
1788.

=Walton, Brian.= 1600-1661. Bp. Chester. Editor of the London
Polyglott Bible. _See Life, by Todd, 1821._

=Walton, Izaak.= 1593-1683. Biographer and angler. The Complete
Angler, his chief work, is a book of much quiet beauty. _Pub. Lit._

=Warburton, Eliot Bartholomew Geo.= 1810-1852. Irish novelist and
miscellaneous writer. Author The Crescent and the Cross, Prince
Rupert and the Cavaliers, etc.

=Warburton, George.= ---- 1857. Bro. to E. B. G. W. Author Conquest of
Canada, Hochelaga, etc. _Pub. Har._

=Warburton, Wm.= 1698-1779. Bp. Gloucester. A learned and brilliant
but arrogant author. He wrote The Divine Legation of Moses, and
published an edition of Shakespeare in 1747. _See Life, by Watson,
1863, and Quarterly Rev. June, 1812._

=Ward, Robert Plumer.= 1765-1846. Novelist. Author Tremaine, De Vere,
De Clifford, and Chatsworth; metaphysical, philosophical, and
political narratives. _See Memoirs, 1850._ _Pub. Har._

=Waring, Anna L.= 18-- ----. Welsh poet. Author of Hymns and
Meditations. _Pub. Dut._

=Warner, Ferdinando.= 1703-1768. Historian. Author Eccl. Hist.
England, Hist. Ireland, etc.

=Warner, Wm.= 1558-1609. Poet. Author of Albion's England, a hist. of
England from the Deluge to Elizabeth, containing 10,000 14-syllable
lines. It is humorous, spirited, and even pathetic in places. _See
Craik's Eng. Lit., vol. 1, and Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=Warren, John Leicester.= 18--  ----. Poet. Author Philoctetes,
Rehearsals, Orestes, Searching the Net, etc. _See Stedman's Victorian
Poets._ _Pub. Rou._

=Warren, Samuel.= 1807-1877. Novelist and physician. Author Diary of a
Physician, and the famous novel Ten Thousand a Year. _Pub. Har. Por._

=Warton, Joseph.= 1722-1800. Poet and critic. _See Biography, by Wool,
1806._

=Warton, Thomas.= 1728-1790. Poet and critic. Bro. to J. W. A
valuable Hist. Eng. Poetry is his chief prose work. _See Carew
Hazlitt's edition._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._ _Pub. Rou._

=Waterton, Charles.= 1782-1865. Naturalist. Author Essays on Nat.
Hist., etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Watson, Richard.= 1737-1816. Bp. Llandaff. Theologian. Author of
Apologies for Christianity and the Bible, etc. _See Autobiography,
1817._ _Pub Phi._

=Watson, Robert.= 1730-1780. Scotch historian. Author of a worthless
Hist. of Philip II.

=Watson, Thomas.= 1560-1592. Poet. His Sonnets have been much praised.
_See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._

=Watts, Alaric Alexander.= 1799-1864. Poet. Author Poetical Sketches,
Lyrics of the Heart, etc.

=Watts, Mrs. Anna Mary [Howitt].= 182 Artist and miscellaneous
writer. Author of The Art Student in Munich, Pioneers of Spiritualism,
containing Lives of Dr. Justinius Kerner and Wm. Howitt, written from
the psychological point of view, etc.

=Watts, Isaac.= 1674-1748. Religious poet. Author Psalms and Hymns,
etc. While some of his verse is hardly more than doggerel, he
sometimes rises to a lofty plane of expression. _See Life, by Milner,
1834._ _Pub. Ca. Hou. Rou._

=Waugh [waw], Edwin.= 181 Dialect poet. Author Lancashire Songs,
etc.

=Webster, Mrs. Augusta.= 184 Poet. Author Dramatic Studies,
Portraits, A Woman Sold, translations from Euripides, etc. Her verse
is strong and original in tone. _See Stedman's Victorian Poets._ _Pub.
Mac._

=Webster, John.= c. 1582-1638. Dramatist. Author of the tragedies of
The White Devil, Duchess of Malfy, Guise, Devil's Law Case, Appius
and Virginia, etc. W. is the greatest master of the terrible among
Eng. dramatists. _See Dyce's edition 1830, and Hazlitt's 1857._ _Pub.
Rou._

=Wesley, Chas.= 1708-1788. Hymn writer of note. _See Ward's Eng.
Poets, vol. 3._

=West, Gilbert.= 1705-1756. Theologian and poet. Translator of Pindar
and author of the able treatise Observations on the Resurrection.

=Westcott, Brooke Foss=. 182 Theologian. Author Hist. Canon of
the New Testament, Hist. of the Eng. Bible, The Bible and the Church,
etc. _Pub. Har. Mac._

=Westwood, Thos.= 181 Poet. Author Beads from a Rosary, Quest of
the Sancgreal, Berries and Blossoms, etc.

=Whately [hw[=a]t'l[)i]], Richard.= 1787-1863. Abp. Dublin. Essayist.
Author New Testament Difficulties, Political Economy, Logic and
Rhetoric, etc. A thinker of logical but unimaginative powers. _See
Life and Correspondence, edited by his daughter, 1864, and H.
Martineau's Biographical Sketches._ _Pub. Ca. Dra. Har. Sh._

=Whetstone, Geo.= fl. c. 1580. Dramatist. From his play Promos and
Cassandra Shakespeare has drawn the story of Measure for Measure.

=Whewell [h[=u]'[e)]l], Wm.= 1794-1866. Philosopher. Author Hist.
Inductive Sciences, Plurality of Worlds, Hist. Moral Philosophy in
England, Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, etc. _Pub. Apl. Har._

=Whiston, Wm.= 1667-1752. Theologian and mathematician. Author of A
New Theory of the Earth, etc., and editor of Josephus. _Pub. Por._

=Whitaker, John.= 1735-1808. Historian. Author Hist. of Manchester,
Mary, Queen of Scots, Vindicated, etc.

=White, Gilbert.= 1720-1793. Author of the Naturalist's Calendar and
the delightful Nat. Hist. of Selborne. _See Buckland's edition,
London, 1875._ _See Fraser's Mag., March, 1879._ _Pub. Har. Mac. Rou._

=White, Henry.= 183 Archaeologist and religious writer. Author
Historical Memorials of the Savoy Conferences on Art and History, etc.
_See The Biograph, Aug. 1880._

=White, Henry Kirke.= 1785-1806. Poet. His verse is mediocre and
crude. _See Life, by Southey._ _Pub. Apl. Hou._

=White, James.= 1804-1862. Historical writer. Author Historical
Landmarks, The Eighteen Christian Centuries, Hist. of France, Hist. of
England, etc. _Pub. Apl. Rou._

=White, Joseph Blanco.= 1775-1841. Miscellaneous writer. His Sonnet on
Night is widely known and esteemed.

=Whitehead, Paul.= 1710-1774. Poet. Style witty and satirical.

=Whitehead, Wm.= 1715-1785. Poet. Of his seven indifferent dramas the
best are Creusa and The Roman Father. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._

=Whitelocke, Bulstrode.= 1605-1676. Historical writer. His Memorials
of Eng. Affairs and other works are of much value.

=Wicklif, John.= 1324-1384. Reformer. Translator of the Bible. _See T.
Arnold's Select Eng. Works of 1871._ _See Biography, by Vaughan,
1853._ _Pub. Mac._

=Wilberforce, Robert Isaac.= 1802-1857. Theological writer. Son to W.
W.

=Wilberforce, Samuel.= 1805-1873. Bp. Oxford. Son to W. W. Author
Hist. P. E. Church in America, Sermons, Eucharistica, etc. _See Life,
1883._ _Pub. Ca. Dut._

=Wilberforce, Wm.= 1759-1833. Philanthropist. Author Practical View of
Christianity, etc. _See Life, by his sons, 5 vols., London, 1838;
also, Life, by John Stoughton._

=Wilde, Oscar.= 185 Irish poet. Charmides and Ave Imperatrix are
among his finest poems. His verse is musical, but frequently erotic.
_See The Biograph, Aug. 1880._ _Pub. Rob._

=Wilkie, Wm.= 1721-1772. Scotch poet. Author of The Epigoniad.

=Wilkins, John.= 1614-1672. Bp. Chester. Of his many works, the chief
is the Discovery of a New World, which attempts to prove the
feasibility of a passage from the earth to the moon.

=Wilkinson, Sir John Gardner.= 1797-1875. Egyptologist. Author Manners
and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, Architecture of Ancient Egypt,
Modern Egypt, etc. _See Memoir, by his wife, 1876._ _Pub. Har. Lit._

=Wilkinson, John James Garth.= 181 Physician. Author Biography
of Swedenborg, The Human Body, The Ministry of Health, etc. _Pub.
Lip._

=Williams, Sir Chas. Hanbury.= 1709-1759. Satirist and poet.

=Williams, Helen Maria.= 1762-1827. Poet and political writer. Author
of the familiar hymn beginning "While Thee I seek, Protecting Power."

=Williams, Monier.= 181 Sanskrit scholar. Author Eng. and
Sanskrit Dict., and Sanskrit and Eng. Dict., etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Williams, Rowland.= 1817-1870. Welsh theologian. _See Life, by his
wife, 1874._

=Wills, Wm. Gorman.= 182 Dramatist and novelist. Eugene Aram,
Jane Shore, Charles I., and Mary Stuart are some of his plays. _Pub.
Har._

=Wills, Wm. Henry.= 1810-1880. Journalist and miscellaneous writer.
_Pub. Har._

=Wilmot, John, Earl of Rochester.= 1647-1680. Poet. A writer of
numerous gay, witty, but extremely licentious lyrics.

=Willmott, Robert Avis.= 1809-1863. Poet and biographer. Author Life
of Jeremy Taylor, and editor of Herbert, Gray, Cowper, etc. _Pub.
Rou._

=Wilson, Daniel.= 181 Miscellaneous writer. Author of
Prehistoric Annals of Scotland, Prehistoric Man, Caliban the Missing
Link, Chatterton: a Biographical Study, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Wilson, George.= 1818-1859. Chemist and essayist. Author Five
Gateways to Knowledge, Life Prof. Forbes, etc. _See Memoir, by his
sister._ _Pub. Mac._

=Wilson, Horace Hayman.= 1788-1860. Sanskrit scholar. Author Hist.
Cashmere, translation of the Rig-Veda, etc.

=Wilson, John=, "Christopher North." 1785-1854. Poet and essayist.
Author of the poems The Isle of Palms and The City of the Plague, of
the stories Margaret Lyndsay and Lights and Shadows of Scottish Life,
and of the famous Noctes Ambrosianae. His style could be tender and
pathetic, but as a reviewer it was often coarse, prejudiced, and
brutal. _See Ferrier's edition, 12 vols._ _See Life, by Mrs. Gordon,
1862._ _Pub. Arm. Ca. Wid._

=Wilson, Sir Thomas.= 1523-1581. Author of The Art of Rhetoric, etc.

=Wilson, Wm.= 1801-1860. Scotch poet. _See Grant Wilson's Poets of
Scotland._

=Winchelsea, Countess Anne.= c. 1700-1720. Poet. Author of The
Nocturnal Reverie, etc. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._

=Wingate, David.= 182 Scotch poet. Author Annie Weir, etc. _See
Grant Wilson's Poets of Scotland._

=Winkworth, Catherine.= 1825-1878. Hymnologist. Editor Hymns of the
Ages, Lyra Germanica, etc. _Pub. Mac._

=Winslow, Forbes Benignus.= 1810-1874. Physician. Author Physic and
Physicians, The Anatomy of Suicide, Lectures on Insanity, Obscure
Diseases of the Brain, etc.

=Wiseman, Nicholas, Cardinal.= 1802-1865. Miscellaneous writer. Author
works on religion, science, art, literature, etc.

=Wither, George.= 1588-1677. Poet. A voluminous writer, best known by
his Shepherd's Resolution and The Steadfast Shepherd. Style forcible
and original. _See Craik's Eng. Lit., vol. 2, and Ward's Eng. Poets,
vol. 2._

=Wolcott [w[)o]l'k[o^]t, or w[)oo]l'k[o^]t], John=, "Peter Pindar."
1738-1819. Poet. Author of numerous witty, satirical poems, as The
Lousiad, Bozzy and Piozzi, and the Lyric Odes of Peter Pindar, many of
which were in ridicule of George III.

=Wolfe, Charles.= 1791-1823. Irish poet. Author of the famous Lines on
the Burial of Sir John Moore. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 4._

=Wollstonecraft, Mary.= See Godwin, Mrs. Mary.

=Wood, Anthony.= 1632-1695. Antiquary. Author Athenae Oxonienses, etc.
_See Rawlinson's Life, 1811._

=Wood, Mrs. Ellen [Price].= 182 Novelist. Of her many novels,
East Lynne is the most famous. Johnny Ludlow is one of her best books.
_Pub. Di. Pet._

=Wood, Mrs. Henry.= See Wood, Mrs. Ellen.

=Wood, John George.= 182 Naturalist. Author Homes without Hands,
Bible Animals, Common Objects of the Sea and Shore, etc. _Pub. Cas.
Har. Por. Rou._

=Woodhouselee, Lord.= See Tytler, A. F.

=Woolner, Thomas.= 182 Sculptor and poet. Author My Beautiful
Lady, etc. Style delicate and pure. _Pub. Mac._

=Worboise, Mrs. Emma Jane.= 182 Novelist. Author Helen Bury,
Lights and Shadows of Christian Life, Thornycroft Hall, etc. _Pub.
Rou._

=Wordsworth, Chas.= 180 Bp. St. Andrew's. Son to succeeding.
Neph. to W. W. Author Shakespeare's Knowledge and Use of the Bible,
The Bible in the Authorized Version with Notes and Introduction, etc.
_Pub. Dut. Mac._

=Wordsworth, Christopher.= 1774-1846. Bro. to W. W. Author Eccl.
Biography, etc.

=Wordsworth, Christopher.= 180 Bp. Lincoln. Son to preceding.
Author Hist. Church in Ireland, Memoirs Wm. Wordsworth, etc. _Pub.
Dut._

=Wordsworth, Wm.= 1770-1850. His poems number in all 485, including
the long poems, The Excursion, Peter Bell, White Doe, and the Prelude.
The best of his verse is contained in the Ode on Immortality, Tintern
Abbey, Ode to Duty, Laodamia, The Cuckoo, Lucy, and a few of the
Sonnets, some of which are nearly perfect of their kind. Much of his
verse contains little of real interest, but his best is poetry of the
very highest type. _See Grosart's complete edition, 1875._ _See Lives,
by Bp. Wordsworth, Phillips, and Paxton Hood; also, Myers's
Wordsworth, in Eng. Men of Letters, Masson's Essays, and Shairp's
Studies in Poetry._ _Pub. Hou. Mac. Por. Rou._

=Worsley, Philip Stanhope.= ---- 1866. Poet. Translator of the Iliad.

=Wotton, Sir Henry.= 1586-1639. Poet and miscellaneous writer. His
most familiar poem is the one beginning, "How happy is he born and
taught." _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 2._

=Wotton, Wm.= 1666-1726. Author of the Reflections upon Ancient and
Modern Learning, one of the original sources of the Boyle and Bentley
controversy.

=Wrangham, Francis.= 1769-1843. Poet and translator from the classics.

=Wraxall, Sir Fred'k Chas. Lascelles.= 1828-1865. Novelist. Author
Wild Oats, Camp Life, Memoirs Queen Hortense, etc.

=Wraxall, Sir Nathaniel.= 1751-1831. Historical writer. Author Memoirs
Kings of France, Hist. France, Historical Memoirs of my own Time, etc.

=Wright, Thomas.= 181 Archaeologist. Author Domestic Manners in
England in the Middle Ages, Wanderings of an Antiquary, Hist. of
Caricature and the Grotesque, Womankind in Western Europe, etc. _Pub.
Apl._

=Wright, Wm. Aldis.= 183 Shakespearean scholar. Co-editor with
Clark of the Cambridge Shakespeare, 9 vols., 1866, and of the Globe
Shakespeare.

=Wyatt, Sir Thomas.= 1503-1542. Poet. Author of love lyrics, one of
the finest being Forget not yet the Tried Intent. _See Poems with
Memoir, 1831._ _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 1._ _Pub. Hou._

=Wycherley [w[)i]tch-[e)]r-l[)i]], Wm.= 1640-1715. Dramatist. The
Country Wife and The Plain Dealer are the best of his plays, all of
which are witty, sprightly, and immoral. _See edition of 1831, with
Congreve, Farquhar, and Vanbrugh._ _Pub. Ron._

=Wyckliffe.= See Wiclif, John.

=Wynter, Andrew.= 1819-1876. Miscellaneous writer. Author Our Social
Bees, Curiosities of Civilization, Borderlands of Insanity, etc. _Pub.
Put._




=Yates, Edmund Hodgson.= 183 Novelist. Author Black Sheep, The
Yellow Flag, Kissing the Rod, Wrecked in Port, etc. _Pub. Apl. Har.
Rou._

=Yonge [y[)u]ng], Charles Duke.= 181 Historian. Author Hist.
British Navy, Hist. Eng. Revolution of 1688, Hist. France Under the
Bourbons, Three Centuries of Modern Hist., etc. _Pub. Apl. Har._

=Yonge, Charlotte Mary.= 182 Novelist. Cousin to C. D. Y. An
industrious writer, of whose 50 vols. more than 30 are fictions. The
Heir of Redclyffe is her most noted book; others are Heartsease, Hopes
and Fears, and The Daisy Chain. Her work is all careful, well
intentioned, and strongly High Church in character. _Pub. Apl. Dut.
Est. Har. Ho. Lip. Lo. Mac. Phi. Rob_.

=Youatt [yoo'[a)]t], Wm.= 1777-1847. Veterinary writer. Author of The
Horse, Cattle, Sheep, The Pig, and other similar standard works. _Pub.
Ju. Lip. Por. Rou._

=Young, Arthur.= 1741-1820. Agricultural writer of note. Author Rural
Economy, Six Months' Tour through North of England, etc. _See
Allibone's Dict. and Donaldson's Agricultural Biography._

=Young, Edward.= 1684-1765. Poet. Author Night Thoughts, etc. Style
strained and affected. _See Ward's Eng. Poets, vol. 3._ _Pub. Apl. Ca.
Hou._

=Young, Thomas.= 1773-1829. Scientific writer of eminence. _See
Peacock's Life of._




=Zouch, Richard.= c. 1590-1660. A voluminous legal writer.

=Zouch, Thomas.= 1737-1815. Miscellaneous writer. Author Memoirs Sir
Philip Sidney, Izaak Walton, etc.




ADDENDA.


=Bain, Alexander.= 181 Philosopher. Author The Senses and the
Intellect, The Emotions and the Will, Study of Character, Mental and
Moral Science, Logic, Mind and Body, Education as a Science, Life of
John Stuart Mill, etc. _Pub. Apl. Ho._

=Barnes, Wm.= 181 Poet and philologist. Author of Poems of Rural
Life in the Dorset Dialect, Grammar of the Dorset Dialect, etc. _Pub.
Rob._

=Bastian, Henry Charlton.= 183 Physician. Author The Beginnings
of Life, Evolution and the Origin of Life, Common Forms of Paralysis
from Brain Disease, etc. _Pub. Apl. Mac._

=Blackburn, Henry.= 183 Traveler. Author Travelling in Spain,
Normandy Picturesque, The Pyrenees, Artists and Arabs, Art in the
Mountains, etc. _Pub. Os._

=Browning, Oscar.= 183 Litterateur. Author of Hist. Educational
Theories. Modern England, 1820-1874, Modern France, 1815-1880, etc.,
and articles in Encyc. Brit. on Caesar, Carthage, Dante, Goethe, etc.
_Pub. Har._

=Buxton, Mrs. B. H. [Bee].= 184 Dramatic novelist. Author of
Jennie of the Prince's, Great Grenfell Gardens, Nell: on and off the
Stage, From the Wings, etc. _See the Biograph, Aug. 1880._ _Pub. Har.
Rou._

=Clark, Wm. George.= 1821-1878. Shakespearean scholar. Co-editor with
Wm. Aldis Wright, of the Cambridge and Globe editions of Shakespeare.

=Coleridge, Derwent.= 1800-1883. Miscellaneous writer. Son to S. T.
Coleridge. Author Scriptural Character of the English Church, Memoir
of Hartley Coleridge, Life of Praed, etc.

=Cook, Dutton.= 1832-1883. Novelist and dramatic critic. Author of
Young Mr. Nightingale, Art in England, The Book of the Play, etc.

=Craik, Georgiana Marion.= 183 Novelist. Author of Faith Unwin's
Ordeal, Mildred, Sylvia's Choice, Dorcas, Two Women, Winnifred's
Wooing, Only a Butterfly, The Cousin from India, Anne Warwick, Miss
Moore, etc. _Pub. Har. Rou._

=Crosland, Mrs. Camilla [Toulmin].= 181 Miscellaneous writer.
Author Hubert Freeth's Prosperity, The Island of the Rainbow, Hildred
the Daughter, Stratagems, etc. _Pub. Lip. Rou._

=Crosland, Mrs. Newton.= See Crosland, Mrs. Camilla.

=Geikie, Alexander.= 183 Geologist. Author The Story of a
Boulder, Phenomena of the Glacial Drift of Scotland, etc.

=Harris, George.= 180 Philosophical writer. Author True Theory
of Representation in a State, Theory of the Arts, Civilization as a
Science, Philosophical Treatise on the Nature and Constitution of Man,
etc. _See the Biograph, Aug. 1880._ _Pub. Apl._

=Sheppard, Elizabeth Sara.= ---- 1862. Novelist. Author Rumor,
Counterparts, Almost a Heroine, and the famous musical romance Charles
Auchester. _See Atlantic Monthly, June, 1862._




Transcriber's Note:


Not all letters can be shown as in the original text. The following
convention has been used to indicate letters which can not be
represented (where x denotes the letter).

  [)x] letter with breve above
  [=x] letter with macron above
  [^x] letter with circumflex above
  [x^] letter with circumflex below