Produced by Curtis Weyant, Christine D. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Posner Memorial Collection
(http://posner.library.cmu.edu/Posner/))






   Transcriber's Note

   Led by the belief that the spelling and punctuation of each
   entry is based directly on the original title pages no
   intentional 'corrections' have been made to the content. The
   text in this e-book is as close to the original printed text
   as pgdp proofing and postprocessing could get it. In some
   entries larger spaces are used as spacers between
   bibliographic fields instead of punctuation. These have been
   retained to the best of our ability and are represented as
   non-breaking spaces.


  A CATALOGUE OF
  Books in English
  later than 1700, forming
  a portion of the Library
  of Robert Hoe New
  York 1905

  EX
  LIBRIS
  ROBERT
  HOE

VOLUME II


CATALOGUE

VOLUME II


  ONE HUNDRED COPIES ONLY, INCLUDING
  THREE UPON IMPERIAL
  JAPANESE VELLUM--PRINTED BY
  THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, CAMBRIDGE


  A Catalogue of Books
  in English
  Later than 1700

  Forming a Portion of the Library
  of Robert Hoe

[Illustration]

VOLUME II

  Privately Printed
  New York . 1905


  THIS CATALOGUE WAS COMPILED BY
  CAROLYN SHIPMAN




THE CATALOGUE


HADEN, SIR FRANCIS SEYMOUR.--The Etched Work of Rembrandt critically
considered. By Francis Seymour Haden, . . . 1877.   110 copies privately
printed for the Author. [London, Metchim & Son] _4to, paper._

First edition. Three photogravure plates.


HADEN, SIR FRANCIS SEYMOUR.--About Etching. Part I. Notes by Mr. Seymour
Haden on a collection of etchings and engravings by the great masters
lent by him to the Fine Art Society to illustrate the subject of
etching. Part II. An annotated catalogue of the examples exhibited of
etchers and painter-engravers' work. Illustrated with An original
Etching by Mr. Seymour Haden, and fifteen facsimiles of Etchings.
[London] The Fine Art Society . . . 1879. _4to, half brown morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges._

First edition.


HAEBLER, KONRAD.--The Early Printers of Spain and Portugal   By Konrad
Haebler   London printed for the Bibliographical Society at the Chiswick
Press   March 1897 for 1896. _Royal 4to, original paper wrappers, uncut
edges._

Woodcut frontispiece and thirty-three plates.

No. IV. of Illustrated Monographs issued by the Bibliographical Society.


HAFIZ.--The D[=i]v[=a]n, written in the fourteenth century, by [Persian
name] Khw[=a]ja Shamsu-d-D[=i]n Muham-mad-i [H.][=a]fi[z:]-i-Sh[=i]r[=a]z[=i]
otherwise known as Lis[=a]nu-l-[.Gh=]aib and Tarjum[=a]nu-l-Asr[=a]r.
Translated for the first time out of the Persian into English prose, with
critical and explanatory remarks, with an introductory preface, with a
note on S[=u]f[=i],ism, and with a life of the author, by Lieut.-Col. H.
Wilberforce Clarke, . . . [Calcutta] 1891. _4to, two volumes, cloth._


HAGGARD AND LANG.--The World's Desire by H. Rider Haggard and Andrew
Lang. London: Longmans, Green, and Co. 1890. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER.--The Letter Bag of the Great Western; or,
Life in a Steamer. . . . By the author of "The Sayings and Doings of
Samuel Slick." London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1840. _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First English edition.


HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER.--The Attache; or, Sam Slick in England. By
the author of "The Clockmaker; or, Sayings and Doings of Sam Slick," &c.
. . . Second edition. [First Series] London: Richard Bentley, . . .
1843. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER.--The Attache; or, Sam Slick in England. By
the author of "The Clockmaker; or, Sayings and Doings of Sam Slick," . . .
Second and last series. . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1844.
_Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition of the Second Series.


HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER.--The Clockmaker; or the Sayings and Doings
of Samuel Slick, of Slickville. . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . .
1843. [-M. DCCC. XL.] _Crown 8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

These sketches, as far as Chapter XXI., originally appeared in "The Nova
Scotian" newspaper. Volume III, Third Series, is the first edition,
dated 1840.

Three frontispieces drawn and etched by A. Hervieu.


HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER.--The Old Judge; or, Life in a Colony. By
the author of "Sam Slick, the Clock maker," &c . . . London: Henry
Colburn, . . . 1849. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First English edition.


HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER.--Rule and Misrule of the English in
America. By the author of "Sam Slick, the Clockmaker," . . . London:
Colburn and Co., . . . 1851. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

Presumably the first issue of the first English edition, published under
the same title as the first New York edition of the same date.

As the title-page of the following issue omits the words "Rule and
Misrule," it is probable that the alteration to "The English in America"
was made in deference to English sensibilities. The half-titles in both
issues are the same, "The English in America."


HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER.--The English in America. By the author of
"Sam Slick, the Clockmaker," &c . . . London: Colburn and Co., . . .
1851. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Presumably the second issue of the first English edition.


HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER.--Sam Slick's Wise Saws and Modern
Instances; or, what he said, did, or invented. . . . Second [English]
Edition. . . . London: Hurst and Blackett, . . . 1854. _Crown 8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER.--Nature and Human Nature. By the author of
"Sam Slick, the Clockmaker," &c. . . . London: Hurst and Blackett, . . .
1855. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


HALIFAX, CHARLES MONTAGUE, EARL OF.--Poems on Several Occasions. By the
Right Honourable Charles Earl of Halifax. London: Printed [for E. Curll
&c] in the Year M D C C X V. _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Bedford._

Portrait by M. Van der Gucht.

Collation: Title, A1 (verso blank). "On the Earl of Halifax's Poems. By
Mr. Addison," (verses). A2, Dedication "To the Right Honourable George,
Earl of Halifax," the author's nephew, by the Editor. A3 (misprinted
A2)-A4 (verso blank). Preface, A1, repeated. Poems, etc., pages 1-92.
Memoirs, pages 1-264. Copy of the Will of Lord Halifax, pages i-viii.


HALIFAX, CHARLES MONTAGUE, EARL OF.--(I.) The Works and Life Of the
Right Honourable Charles, late Earl of Halifax. Including the History of
his Lordship's Times. London: Printed for E. Curll, . . . J.
Pemberton, . . . and J. Hooke, . . . M DCCXV. . . . (II.) [Same title as
in the preceding item.] _8vo, Cambridge calf._

Portrait by M. Van der Gucht.

Another issue of the same edition, with a general title-page and without
the verses by Addison. The sheets of the text are the same as in the
other issue.

Collation: General title (I. above), A1 (verso blank). Dedication to
George, Earl of Halifax, A2-A3 (verso blank). Preface, A4. Second title
(II. above), A1, repeated. The remainder of the volume is like the
preceding issue.


HALL, H. BYNG.--The Adventures of a Bric-a-Brac Hunter, by Major H. Byng
Hall . . . London: Tinsley Brothers . . . 1868. . . . _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


HALLAM, HENRY.--Introduction to the Literature of Europe, in the
fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth centuries. By Henry Hallam . . .
London: John Murray . . . MDCCCXXXVII. [-XXXIX.] _8vo, four volumes,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition. Illustrated by the insertion of four hundred and fifty
portraits, the majority being proofs, of which one hundred and five are
on India paper. The portraits include fine examples of engraving by
Faithorne, Hollar, Marshall, Crispin de Pass, Delaram, Nanteuil,
Ficquet, Vertue, and others, and a drawing of Sir John Davies.


HALLAM, HENRY.--Introduction to the Literature of Europe, in the
fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth centuries. By Henry Hallam, . . .
Third edition. . . . London; John Murray, . . . 1847. _8vo, three
volumes, boards, uncut edges._


HALLAM, HENRY.--The Constitutional History of England from the accession
of Henry VII. to the death of George II. By Henry Hallam. Fifth edition
. . . . London; John Murray, . . . 1846. _8vo, two volumes, boards, uncut
edges._


HALLAM, HENRY.--View of the State of Europe during the Middle Ages. [and
Supplemental Notes] By Henry Hallam. . . . Ninth edition. . . . London:
John Murray, . . . 1846. [-1848] _8vo, three volumes, boards, uncut
edges._


HALLECK, FITZ-GREENE.--Fanny. . . . New York: published by C. Wiley &
Co. . . . 1819. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, with the original paper covers, by Riviere._

First edition, with the half-title.


HALLECK, FITZ-GREENE.--Alnwick Castle, with other Poems. New York:
published by G. & C. Carvill, . . . Elliott & Palmer, Printers, 1827.
_8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges,
with the original brown paper wrappers bound in, by David._

First edition.


HALLECK, FITZ-GREENE.--Alnwick Castle, with other poems. By Fitz-Greene
Halleck. New York: Harper & Brothers, . . . 1845. _12mo, brown satin
covers._

Engraved title.


HALLECK, FITZ-GREENE.--The Poetical Works of Fitz-Greene Halleck. Now
first collected. Illustrated with steel engravings, From Drawings by
American Artists. Second edition. New York: D. Appleton & Company . . .
MDCCCXLVIII. _4to, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait, engraved title, and five plates by Durand, Huntington, Leutze,
and others.


HALLECK AND DRAKE.--The Poetical Writings of Fitz-Greene Halleck, with
extracts from those of Joseph Rodman Drake. Edited by James Grant
Wilson. New York: D. Appleton and Company, . . . 1869. _Royal 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

No. 36 of one hundred and fifty copies printed on large paper. Two
portraits, one by J. Cheney after C. L. Elliott, engraved title-page,
and six other plates after Leutze, Durand, Weir, and others.


HALLECK, FITZ-GREENE.--See Drake, J. R.


HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPS, JAMES ORCHARD, _editor_.--The Jokes of the
Cambridge Coffee-houses in the seventeenth century. Edited by James
Orchard Halliwell, Esq. Cambridge; Thomas Stevenson; . . . 1841. _12mo,
red morocco, gilt top, by Alfred Matthews._

J. Payne Collier's copy, with his autograph on the title-page.


HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPS, JAMES ORCHARD.--The Life of William Shakespeare.
Including many particulars respecting the poet and his family never
before published. By James Orchard Halliwell . . . London: John Russell
Smith . . . MDCCCXLVIII. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition, with seventy-six illustrations.


HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPS, JAMES ORCHARD.--Palatine Anthology; A Collection of
Ancient Poems and Ballads, Relating to Lancashire and Cheshire. Edited
by James Orchard Halliwell, . . . London: For Private Circulation only,
[C. and J. Adlard] M. D.CCC.L. _4to, cloth, uncut edges._

One of ten copies printed upon thick paper.


HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPS AND HALPIN.--Illustrations of the Fairy Mythology of
Shakespeare. By J. O. Halliwell. And Oberon's Vision. (in "A Midsummer
Night's Dream.") illustrated by a comparison with Lylie's "Endymion." By
Rev. N. J. Halpin. [London]. Printed for the Shakespeare Society, . . .
1853. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

The first sub-title is dated 1845, the second, 1843.


HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPS, JAMES ORCHARD, _editor_.--The Nursery Rhymes of
England. Collected chiefly from oral tradition. Edited by James O.
Halliwell, Esq. The sixth edition. London: John Russell Smith [n. d.]
_12mo, half morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Frontispiece, engraved title, and woodcuts.


HALPIN, NICHOLAS JOHN.--See Halliwell and Halpin.


HALSEY, R. T. HAINES.--Pictures of Early New York on dark blue
Staffordshire Pottery together with pictures of Boston and New England
Philadelphia, the South and West by R. T. Haines Halsey [coloured bust
of Washington] Dodd, Mead and Company New York . . . M DCCC XCIX.
_Imperial 8vo, vellum boards, decorated, uncut edges._

One of thirty copies printed on imperial Japan paper. One hundred and
sixty-six coloured illustrations.


HALSEY, R. T. HAINES.--The Boston Port Bill as pictured by a
contemporary London cartoonist by R. T. H. Halsey [coloured medallion
portrait] New York the Grolier Club [Gilliss Press] M CMIV. _8vo,
original calf, uncut edges._

Three hundred and twenty-five copies printed. Thirty-three
illustrations.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--The Isles of Loch Awe And other Poems. By
Philip Gilbert Hamerton . . . London: W. E. Painter and Sons . . . 1859.
_Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Sixteen illustrations, some tinted.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--A Painters Camp. in three books . . . In
England . . . Scotland . . . France. London: Macmillan and Co. 1866.
_Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--Contemporary French Painters. An Essay by
Philip Gilbert Hamerton, . . . With sixteen photographic illustrations.
Seeley, Jackson, and Halliday, . . . London. M DCCC LXVIII. _Royal 4to,
decorated cloth, gilt edges._


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--Etching and Etchers. By Philip Gilbert
Hamerton   London. Macmillan & Co. 1868. _Imperial 8vo, brown levant
morocco, the back panels, side border and centre ornament of a Grolier
pattern inlaid with red morocco, gilt over untrimmed edges, by
Zaehnsdorf._

First edition, and one of the few copies left untrimmed.

Thirty-five etchings after Seymour Haden, Cope, Redgrave, Rembrandt,
Daubigny, Jacquemart, etc.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--Etching and Etchers. 1868. _Imperial 8vo,
half blue morocco, uncut edges._

Another copy.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--Etching & Etchers by Philip Gilbert Hamerton
. . . Third edition London. Macmillan and Co. 1880. _4to, half green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Forty-eight plates.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--Painting in France after the decline of
classicism. An Essay by Philip Gilbert Hamerton, . . . with fourteen
photographic illustrations. Seeley, Jackson, and Halliday, . . . London.
MDCCCLXIX. _Royal 4to, half maroon morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges._


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--The Unknown River by Philip Gilbert Hamerton.
Illustrated by the Author, [vignette] Seeley, Jackson, and Halliday, . . .
London. MDCCCLXXI. _8vo, cloth, gilt edges._

Title-vignette and thirty-six plates by the author, on India paper.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--Chapters on Animals. By Philip Gilbert
Hamerton, . . . With Twenty Etchings by J. Veyrassat and Karl Bodmer.
Seeley, Jackson, and Halliday, . . . London, MDCCCLXXIV. _4to, original
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--The Etcher's Handbook. By Philip Gilbert
Hamerton . . . Giving an Account of the Old Processes, and of Processes
recently discovered. Illustrated by the Author . . . second edition.
Charles Robertson & Co . . . London 1875. _Crown 8vo, cloth._

Six etchings.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--The Sylvan Year. Leaves from the note-book of
Raoul Dubois. By Philip Gilbert Hamerton, . . . with twenty etchings by
the author and other artists . . . Seeley, Jackson, and Halliday, . . .
London, MDCCCLXXVI. _4to, original cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--Round my House. Notes of Rural Life in France
in Peace and War by Philip Gilbert Hamerton . . . Seeley, Jackson, and
Halliday . . . London. MDCCCLXXVI. _Crown 8vo, half brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--Modern Frenchmen. Five Biographies. By Philip
Gilbert Hamerton . . . Seeley, Jackson, and Halliday . . . London.
MDCCCLXXVIII. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. The "five Frenchmen" are Victor Jacquemont, Henri
Perreyve, Francois Rude, Jean Jacques Ampere, and Henri Regnault.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--The Life of J. M. W. Turner, R. A. By Philip
Gilbert Hamerton . . . with nine illustrations, etched by A.
Brunet-Debaines. Seeley, Jackson, & Halliday . . . London. MDCCCLXXIX.
_Post 8vo, half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

In addition to the nine plates, numerous other illustrations are
interspersed in the text.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--The Intellectual Life.   By Philip Gilbert
Hamerton.   With a portrait of Leonardo da Vinci, etched by Leopold
Flameng . . . third edition.   London: Macmillan and Co.   1882. _Crown
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--The Graphic Arts   a Treatise on the
Varieties of Drawing, Painting, and Engraving in comparison with each
other and with nature   by Philip Gilbert Hamerton . . . London Seeley,
Jackson, and Halliday, . . . 1882.   _Royal 4to, vellum boards, uncut
edges._

Large paper copy of the first edition, with fifty-four illustrations.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--Human Intercourse   by Philip Gilbert
Hamerton . . . London   Macmillan and Co.   1885. _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--Drawing and Engraving   A brief exposition of
technical principles & practice   by Philip Gilbert Hamerton . . . With
numerous illustrations selected or commissioned by the author   London
and Edinburgh   Adam and Charles Black   1892.   _4to, buckram, gilt
top, uncut edges._

Coloured frontispiece, twenty-two other plates, and numerous
illustrations in the text.


HAMERTON, PHILIP GILBERT.--Man in Art Studies in religious and
historical Art, Portrait, and Genre by Philip Gilbert Hamerton, . . .
With forty-six plates in line-engraving, mezzotint, photogravure,
hyalography, and wood engraving   London   Macmillan and Co . . . 1892.
_Royal 4to, vellum boards, uncut edges._

Large paper copy of the first edition, with plates on Japan paper.


HAMILTON, ALEXANDER.--Observations on Certain Documents contained in No.
V & VI. of "The History of the United States for the year 1796" in which
the Charge of Speculation against Alexander Hamilton, late Secretary of
the Treasury is fully refuted.   Written by himself.   Philadelphia:
printed for John Fenno, by John Bioren 1797.   _8vo, brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Rousselle._

First edition, almost the whole of which was destroyed by Hamilton's
friends.


HAMILTON, LADY ANNE.--Secret History of the Court of England, from the
Accession of George the Third to the Death of George the Fourth;
including, among other important matters, full particulars of the
mysterious death of the Princess Charlotte.   By the Right Honorable,
Lady Anne Hamilton . . . London: William Henry Stevenson . . . 1832.
_8vo, two volumes, boards, uncut edges._

First edition.


HAMILTON, COUNT ANTHONY.--Memoirs of Count Grammont, by Count A.
Hamilton.   Translated from the French, with Notes and Illustrations.
Second edition, revised. . . . London: Printed by T. Bensley, . . . for
J. White, &c . . . 1809.   _8vo, three volumes, olive levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges._

First octavo edition.   Thirty-nine portraits by Gardiner, Bocquet, and
others, and one view.


HAMILTON, COUNT ANTHONY.--Memoirs of Count Grammont, by Anthony
Hamilton.   A new edition. To which are prefixed, a biographical sketch
of Count Hamilton, and a translation of the epistle to Count Grammont.
Illustrated by Sixty-four Portraits, engraved by Edward Scriven, &c. . . .
London: printed for James Carpenter, . . . and William Miller, . . .
1811.   _4to, two volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Large paper copy.   Over one hundred portraits added, including proofs
of the Scriven plates, rare old copper-plates, brilliant mezzotints, and
steel engravings.   Many of the plates are in two states, and one is
printed in colours.


HAMILTON, COUNT ANTHONY.--Memoirs of Count Grammont, by Count A.
Hamilton.   Translated from the French, with Notes and Illustrations.
A New Edition.   London: W. H. Reid . . . 1828.   _Royal 8vo, two
volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Sixty-eight portraits engraved by Bocquet, Bartolozzi, and others.


HAMILTON, COUNT ANTHONY.--Memoirs of the Court of Charles the Second, by
Count Grammont, with numerous additions and illustrations, as edited by
Sir Walter Scott.   Also: the personal history of Charles, including the
King's own account of his escape and preservation after the battle of
Worcester, as dictated to Pepys.   And The Boscobel Tracts, or,
contemporary narratives of his majesty's adventures, from the murder of
his father to the restoration.   Carefully edited, with additional
illustration.   London: Henry G. Bohn, . . . 1846.   _Post 8vo, half
blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait of Nell Gwyn.


HAMILTON, COUNT ANTHONY.--Memoirs of the Court of Charles the Second.
1846.   _Post 8vo, half rose levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Hardy-Mennil._

Another copy, without the portrait of Nell Gwyn, but with eight inserted
plates.


HAMILTON, COUNT ANTHONY.--Memoirs of Count Grammont by Anthony Hamilton
edited, with notes, by Sir Walter Scott   With a Portrait of the Author
and Thirty-three Etchings by L. Boisson on India paper from Original
Compositions by C. Delort.   In two volumes.   London   John C. Nimmo . . .
MDCCCLXXXIX. _4to, two volumes, blue levant morocco, filleted back
and sides, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

The only copy printed on special hand-made paper, with the etchings in
five and six states from the original outline to the finished proof.


HAMILTON, COUNT ANTHONY.--Fairy Tales and Romances, written by Count
Anthony Hamilton . . . translated from the French by M. Lewis, H. T.
Ryde, and C. Kenney.   London:   Henry G. Bohn . . . MDCCCXLIX.   _Post
8vo, half blue morocco, uncut edges._

Portrait of Count Hamilton by Hinchliff after Harding.


HAMILTON, EDWARD.--A Catalogue raisonne of the Engraved Works of Sir
Joshua Reynolds, P. R. A. from 1755 to 1820.   To which is added A Short
Biographical Sketch of each Engraver.   By Edward Hamilton, . . .
London: P. & D. Colnaghi and Co., . . . 1874. . . . _8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


HAMILTON, EMMA, LADY.--Memoirs of Lady Hamilton; with Illustrative
Anecdotes of Horatio, Lord Viscount Nelson, and many other of her
friends and contemporaries.   Third edition.   London: printed for Henry
Colburn.   1835.   _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Lady Hamilton by Meyer after Romney.


HAMILTON, WALTER.--French Book-Plates   A handbook for Ex-Libris
Collectors, by Walter Hamilton, . . . London: George Bell & Sons, . . .
[Chiswick Press] M dccc xcij.   _8vo, vellum boards, uncut edges._

First edition.   Frontispiece and numerous other full-page cuts and
illustrations in the text.

No. 3 of thirty-six copies printed on Japanese vellum.


HAMILTON, WALTER.--French Book-plates   by Walter Hamilton, . . .
London: George Bell & Sons, . . . [Chiswick Press]   Mdcccxcvi.   _8vo,
Japanese paper boards, uncut edges._

No. 34 of thirty-eight copies printed on Japanese vellum, with numerous
woodcuts.


HAMILTON, WILLIAM.--Poems on several occasions.   By William Hamilton of
Bangour, Esquire. Edinburgh:   Printed for W. Gordon . . . MDCCLX. _8vo,
green levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Portrait.


HANCOCK, JOHN.--An Oration; delivered March 5, 1774, at the Request of
the Inhabitants of the Town of Boston: to Commemorate the Bloody Tragedy
of the fifth of March 1770.   By The Honorable John Hancock, Esq; . . .
Boston: Printed by Edes and Gill, in Queen Street, M, DCC, LXXIV.
_4to, brown morocco, gilt back._

Inserted are three portraits of Hancock, an engraving of the Massacre in
King Street, and a manuscript document dated October 19, 1770, and
signed by Joseph Jackson, John Hancock, Samuel Pemberton, and Jonathan
Mason, Selectmen of Boston.


HANDEL AND SMITH.--Anecdotes of George Frederick Handel, and John
Christopher Smith.   With select pieces of music, composed by J. C.
Smith, never before published.   London: printed by W. Bulmer and Co. . . .
1799.   _Folio, half cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait of Handel by E. Harding after Denner and of Smith by Harding
after Zoffany, and thirty-four pages of music score.


HANSARD, GEORGE AGAR.--Trout and Salmon Fishing in Wales.   By George
Agar Hansard.   London: printed for Longman, . . . 1834.   _Post 8vo,
original cloth, uncut edges._


HANSARD, THOMAS CURSON.--Typographia: an historical sketch of the origin
and progress of the Art of Printing; with practical directions for
conducting every department in an office: with a description of
Stereotype and Lithography.   Illustrated by Engravings, Biographical
Notices, and Portraits.   By T. C. Hansard.   Printed for Baldwin,
Cradock, and Joy: London.   1825.   _Royal 8vo, half brown morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._


HANSARD, THOMAS CURSON.--Treatises on Printing and Type-Founding; by T.
C. Hansard . . . Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black . . . MDCCCXLI.
_12mo, half red morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


HARDING, J. D.--The Principles and Practice of Art.   By J. D. Harding.
   With illustrations drawn and engraved by the author.   London: Chapman
and Hall, . . . M DCCC XLV.   _Folio, cloth, uncut edges._

Twenty-three plates.


HARDING, J. D.--The Guide and Companion to the "Lessons on Art."   By J.
D. Harding, . . . London: Day and Son, . . . [n. d.]   _Royal 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

Fifteen plates, some tinted, and illustrations in the text.


HARDY, THOMAS.--The Hand of Ethelberta   a comedy in chapters by Thomas
Hardy . . . with eleven illustrations . . . London Smith, Elder, & Co.,
. . . 1876.   _Crown 8vo, two volumes, half brown levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


HARDY, THOMAS.--The Woodlanders   by Thomas Hardy . . . London Macmillan
and Co. . . . 1887 . . . _Crown 8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


HARDY, THOMAS.--Tess of the D'Urbervilles   a pure woman faithfully
presented by Thomas Hardy James R. Osgood, M^{c}Ilvaine and Co., . . .
London 1892.   _Crown 8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


HARDY, W. J.--Book-Plates   By W. J. Hardy, . . . London Kegan Paul,
Trench, Truebner & Co., . . . MDCCCXCIII.   _8vo, half vellum, uncut
edges._

No. 18 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed: with woodcut
title, and forty illustrations on Japan paper.


HARFORD, JOHN S.--The Life of Michael Angelo Buonarotti.   With
Translations of many of his Poems and Letters.   Also Memoirs of
Savonarola, Raphael, and Vittoria Colonna.   By John S. Harford . . .
Second edition   London: Longman &c . . . 1858.   _8vo, two volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

Twenty-one steel portraits, etc.


HARLEY PAMPHLETS.--(I.) A Dialogue between Louis le Petite, [Erasmus
Lewis] and Harlequin le Grand. [Harley] Containing, Many S----e Riddles,
C----t Intrigues, Welch Witticisms, pedagogue Puns, S----y Quibbles,
and occasional Conundrums. . . . Sold by the Booksellers.   [n. d.]
(II.) A Short History of the Parliament. . . . [By Robert Walpole]
London: Printed for T. Warner, . . . 1713.   Price 6d.   (III.) Neck or
Nothing: in a Letter to the Right Honourable the Lord ---- being a
Supplement To the short History of the Parliament.   Also The New Scheme
(mention'd in the foresaid History) which the English and Scotch
Jacobites have concerted for bringing in the Pretender, Popery and
Slavery.   With the True Character or Secret History of the Present
Ministry.   Written by his Grace John Duke . . . [John Dunton] . . .
London, Printed by T. Warner . . . 1713.   Price 6d.   (IV.) Queen
Robin: or the Second Part of Neck or Nothing.   Detecting the Secret
Reign of The Four last Years.   In a Familiar Dialogue between Mr.
Truman (alias Mr. John Dunton) and his Friend, meeting accidentaly at
the Proclaiming King George. . . . [By John Dunton]   London: Printed
for M. Brudenell, . . .   [n. d.]   (V.) The Pudding Plot detected: in a
Letter to Mr. J----n D--t--n, Author of Neck or Nothing. . . . London:
Printed, and Sold by James Bettenham, . . . M DCC XVIII.   (Price
Two-Pence.)   _8vo, five works in one volume, half red levant morocco,
uncut edges._

"Neck or Nothing" is a violent attack on Harley and Bolingbroke by John
Dunton, who got himself into trouble for writing it, and was some time
in hiding. In another pamphlet, "Impeachment, or Great Britain's charge
. . . ," published some months later, Dunton describes himself on the
title as "The unknown author of 'Neck or Nothing,' who being buried
alive [i.e., forced to abscond] for daring to call a Spade a Spade."


HARLEY, WILLIAM.--The Harleian Dairy System; and an account of the
various methods of Dairy Husbandry pursued by the Dutch.   Also, a new
and improved mode of ventilating stables.   With an Appendix, containing
useful hints (founded on the author's experience) for the management of
hedge-row fences, fruit trees, &c.; and the means of rendering barren
land fruitful.   By William Harley. . . . London: James Ridgway, . . .
M. DCCC XXIX.   _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait by R. Scott, and six other plates, two folded and two coloured.


HARRISON, FREDERIC.--The Choice of Books and other literary pieces   by
Frederic Harrison   London Macmillan and Co. . . . 1886.   _8vo,
buckram, uncut edges._

First edition. One of two hundred and fifty large paper copies printed.


HARRISON, WILLIAM.--The Pilgrims, or the Happy Converts.   A New
Dramatick Entertainment. Written by W. H. [Six lines from Wesley's
Epistle to a Friend]   London:   Printed for Richard Harrison . . .
1701.   _4to, flexible red levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by
Mansell-Smith._

First edition. A-H in fours, title on A1.


HARRISSE, HENRY.--Notes on Columbus,   [facsimiles]   New York
Privately Printed [by Samuel L. M. Barlow] MDCCCLXV.   _Folio, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Ninety-nine copies printed, of which fifteen were destroyed by fire in
1894.


HARRISSE, HENRY.--Notes on Columbus.   1865. _Folio, red levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Mansell._

Another copy, one of two printed on India paper, and without facsimiles.


HARRISSE, HENRY.--Christopher Columbus and the Bank of Saint George
(Ufficio di San Giorgio in Genoa)   Two letters addressed to Samuel L.
M. Barlow, Esquire . . . New York   Privately Printed MDCCCLXXXVIII.
_4to, half red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Frontispiece and facsimiles. One hundred and fifty copies printed, of
which twenty-one were destroyed by fire in 1894.


HARRISSE, HENRY.--The Discovery of North America   a critical,
documentary, and historic investigation, with An Essay on the Early
Cartography of the New World, including Descriptions of Two Hundred and
Fifty Maps or Globes existing or lost, constructed before the year 1536;
to which are added A Chronology of One Hundred Voyages Westward,
Projected, Attempted, or Accomplished between 1431 and 1504;
Biographical Accounts of the Three Hundred Pilots who first crossed the
Atlantic; and a Copious List of the Original Names of American Regions,
Caciqueships, Mountains, Islands, Capes, Gulfs, Rivers, Towns, and
Harbours.   By Henry Harrisse. [twenty-three plates]   London: Henry
Stevens and Son, . . . M DCCC XCII.   _4to, brown pigskin, gilt top,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

No. 9 of ten copies printed on Japanese paper.


HART, CHARLES HENRY, _editor_.--Catalogue of the Engraved Portraits of
Washington by Charles Henry Hart   The Grolier Club of the City of New
York MCMIV.   _4to, half vellum, uncut edges._

One of four hundred and twenty-five copies printed. Twenty-one
illustrations.


HARTE, BRET.--Poems.   by Bret Harte.   Boston: Fields, Osgood, & Co.
1871.   _12mo, original cloth._

First issue of the first edition.


HARTE, WALTER.--An Essay on Satire, Particularly on the Dunciad.   By
Mr. Walter Harte of St. Mary-Hall, Oxon.   To which is added, A
Discourse on Satires, Arraigning Persons by Name.   By Monsieur Boileau.
   London: Printed for Lawton Gilliver . . . M DCC XXX.   _8vo, half
brown morocco, citron edges._

Contains half-title and leaf of Announcement preceding the Title and
final leaf of Advertisement.


HASLEM, JOHN.--The Old Derby China Factory: the workmen and their
productions.   Containing biographical sketches of the chief artist
workmen, the various marks used, fac-similes copied from the old Derby
pattern books, the original price list of more than 400 figures and
groups, etc. etc.   By John Haslem.   London: George Bell and Sons, . . .
[Birmingham]   1876.   _Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt top._


HASLEWOOD, JOSEPH.--Some Account of the Life and Publications of the
late Joseph Ritson, Esq. By Joseph Haslewood.   London: printed for
Robert Triphook . . . 1824.   _Crown 8vo, red morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by Lewis. Bound with "Northern Garlands" and "Gammer Gurton."_

Silhouette portrait of Ritson.


HASLEWOOD, JOSEPH.--See Brydges and Haslewood.


HASSELL, JOHN.--Memoirs of the Life of the late George Morland; with
critical and descriptive observations on the whole of his works hitherto
before the public. By J. Hassell.   Illustrated with engravings. . . .
[London] Albion Press printed: published by James Cundee, . . . 1806.
_4to, red levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

Portrait by Mackenzie after Mrs. S. Jones, 1792, frontispiece-title and
seven other plates by Mackenzie and Scott after Morland.


HASTINGS, THOMAS.--Etchings, from the Works of [etched portrait] Ric.
Wilson with some memoirs of his life, &c.   By Thomas Hastings, . . .
Published by Hurst, Robinson & Co. . . . London.   1825.   _Royal 4to,
half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait on the title-page after an original sketch by Sir George
Beaumont, and forty etchings on India paper by Hastings after Wilson.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--Fanshawe, a tale . . . Boston: Marsh & Capen, . . .
1828.   _12mo, olive levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Alfred Matthews._

First edition of Hawthorne's first work.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--Mosses from an Old Manse. By Nathaniel Hawthorne.
New York: Wiley and Putnam. 1846. _12mo, two volumes, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by David._

First edition, with the original covers. Published as Nos. XVII and
XVIII of "Wiley and Putnam's Library of American Books."


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--The Scarlet Letter, a romance. By Nathaniel
Hawthorne. Boston: Ticknor, Reed, and Fields. MDCCCL. _16mo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First issue of the first edition, with the word "reduplicate" on page 21
(line 20), afterwards changed to "repudiate," and again to
"resuscitate."


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--Nathaniel Hawthorne   The Scarlet Letter A
Romance Literally Reprinted from the First Edition. With fifteen
original colored illustrations by A. Robaudi and C. Graham. New York
privately printed [Paris] 1904. _8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt and
mosaic back, sides covered with a rich floral design in mosaic of ivory,
red, and green morocco, gilt tooled, doubled with citron morocco, gilt
over uncut edges, in a blue morocco case, by The Club Bindery._

The only copy printed upon vellum, with the plates in two states, black
and coloured, and the original drawings bound in.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--The House of the Seven Gables, a romance. By
Nathaniel Hawthorne. Boston: Ticknor, Reed, and Fields. MDCCCLI. _16mo,
red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition. Preface dated Lenox, January 27, 1851.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--The Snow Image, and other twice-told tales. By
Nathaniel Hawthorne. Boston: Ticknor, Reed, and Fields. MDCCCLII.
_16mo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First American edition, with Preface dated Lenox, November 1, 1851.
Published early in December, 1851, simultaneously with the London
edition of that date.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--The Blithedale Romance. By Nathaniel Hawthorne.
Boston: Ticknor, Reed, and Fields. MDCCCLII. _16mo, red levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt edges, by David._

First edition. Preface dated Concord, May, 1852.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--Life of Franklin Pierce. By Nathaniel Hawthorne.
Boston: Ticknor, Reed, and Fields. MDCCCLII. _16mo, blue morocco, gilt
fillets, with the original brown paper covers bound in, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition, with portrait by C. E. Wagstaff and J. Andrews after A.
Tenney.


Preface dated Concord, August 27, 1852.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--The Marble Faun: or, The Romance of Monte Beni.
By Nathaniel Hawthorne . . . Boston: Ticknor and Fields. MDCCCLX. _12mo,
two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by
David._

First edition.

The second edition was issued in the same year, with a "Conclusion,"
pages 285-288. The first English edition was printed in 1860 also, in
three volumes, octavo, under the title "Transformation."

The Preface is dated Leamington, December 15, 1859, and at the end of
Volume I are sixteen pages of Advertisements, dated March, 1860.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--The Marble Faun or the Romance of Monte Beni by
Nathaniel Hawthorne illustrated with photogravures . . . Cambridge
Printed at the Riverside Press MDCCCLXXXIX. _8vo, two volumes, vellum
boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 32 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed: with
portrait and fifty illustrations.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--Our Old Home: a series of English Sketches. By
Nathaniel Hawthorne. Boston: Ticknor and Fields. 1863. _16mo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt over rough edges, by David._

First edition. Most of the articles in this volume had appeared in the
Atlantic Monthly.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--Passages from the American Note-Books of
Nathaniel Hawthorne. Boston: Ticknor and Fields. 1868. _12mo, two
volumes, half maroon morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Matthews._

First edition, copyrighted by Sophia Hawthorne.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--Septimus Felton; or, The Elixir of Life. By
Nathaniel Hawthorne. Boston: James R. Osgood and Company. 1872. _12mo,
red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--A Wonder Book for Boys and Girls By Nathaniel
Hawthorne with sixty designs [in colour] by Walter Crane   Cambridge
Printed at the Riverside Press MDCCCXCIII. _8vo, stamped white vellum
boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 50 of two hundred and fifty copies printed.


HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL.--See Lowell, J. R. The Pioneer.


HAY, DAVID RAMSAY.--The Science of Beauty, as developed in nature and
applied in art. By D. R. Hay, . . . William Blackwood and Sons,
Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLVI. _Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Twenty-three plates.


HAYDON, BENJAMIN ROBERT.--Benjamin Robert Haydon: Correspondence and
Table-Talk. With a Memoir by his son, Frederic Wordsworth Haydon. With
facsimile illustrations from his journals . . . London: Chatto and
Windus, . . . 1876. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


HAYDON, BENJAMIN ROBERT.--See Taylor, Tom.


HAYES, ALFRED.--See Gale, Hayes, and Le Gallienne.


HAYLEY, WILLIAM.--The Triumphs of Temper; a Poem: in six cantos. By
William Hayley . . . The tenth edition, corrected. London: printed for
T. Cadell, Jun. and W. Davies, . . . 1799. _Post 8vo, green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Seven plates after the designs of Stothard engraved by Sharp, Heath, and
Neagle. The plate on page 4 is a portrait of Honora Sneyd.


HAYLEY, WILLIAM.--The Triumphs of Temper. A poem: in six cantos. By
William Hayley, Esq. . . . The twelfth edition, corrected. With New
Original Designs, By Maria Flaxman. Chichester: Printed by J. Seagrave:
for T. Cadell and W. Davies, Strand, London. 1803. _8vo, citron levant
morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

Large paper copy. Six plates by W. Blake after Flaxman. The Preface is
dated Eartham, Jan. 31, 1781.


HAYLEY, WILLIAM.--The Triumphs of Temper. 1803. _8vo, green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by F. Bedford._

Another large paper copy.

In addition to the six plates after Maria Flaxman, three portraits of
Hayley have been inserted, the first an unfinished proof by Holloway.


HAYLEY, WILLIAM.--The Life of George Romney, Esq . . . By William
Hayley, Esq.   Chichester: printed by W. Mason, for T. Payne, Pall Mall,
London 1809.   _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt over
rough edges, by Bedford_.

Large paper copy. In addition to the twelve brilliant engravings by
Caroline Watson, this copy is further illustrated by the insertion of
over one hundred portraits and plates, including many examples of
Romney's best work. Some of the plates are on India paper, two are
mezzotints, one a private plate, and all are selected impressions. At
the end is bound a Supplementary Memoir of Romney, by Thomas Phillips,
12 pages.


HAYTER, CHARLES.--An Introduction to Perspective, Practical Geometry,
Drawing and Painting; a new and perfect explanation of the mixture of
colours; with practical directions for Miniature, Crayon, and Oil
Painting; . . . illustrated with numerous wood engravings, from drawings
by John Hayter, Esq. [a steel portrait of the author] and coloured
plates.   By Charles Hayter, Esq. The sixth edition.   London Samuel
Bagster and Sons . . . M.DCCC.XLV.   _8vo, cloth, uncut edges_.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Characters of Shakespear's Plays.   By William
Hazlitt.   London: Printed by C. H. Reynell . . . 1817.   _8vo, russia,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Holloway_.

First edition.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Lectures on the English Poets. Delivered at the Surry
Institution.   By William Hazlitt. London: Printed for Taylor and Hessey
. . . 1818. _8vo, russia, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Holloway_.

First edition.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Lectures on the English Poets.   1818.   _8vo, calf,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford_.

Another copy, illustrated by the insertion of fifty-eight portraits.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--A View of the English Stage; or, a Series of Dramatic
Criticisms.   By William Hazlitt . . . London: Printed for Robert
Stodart . . . 1818.   _8vo, russia, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Holloway._

First edition, with six character portraits inserted, including Harley
as Jack Phantom, the triple portrait.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--A View of the English Stage.   1818.   _8vo, green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Political Essays, with Sketches of Public Characters.
   By William Hazlitt. . . . London: printed for William Hone, . . .
1819. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition. Dedicated to John Hunt.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Lectures on the English Comic Writers. Delivered at
the Surry Institution.   By William Hazlitt . . . London: Printed for
Taylor and Hessey . . . 1819.   _8vo, russia, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Holloway._

First edition.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Lectures on the English Comic Writers.   1819.
_8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

Another copy.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Lectures chiefly on the Dramatic Literature of the
Age of Elizabeth.   Delivered at the Surry Institution.   By William
Hazlitt. . . . London: Stodart and Steuart, 81, Strand; and Bell and
Bradfute, Edinburgh, 1820.   _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Lectures on the Dramatic Literature of the Age of
Elizabeth; delivered at the Surrey Institution, by William Hazlitt.
Second Edition. London: John Warren . . . MDCCCXXI.   _8vo, russia, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Holloway._


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Table-Talk; or, Original Essays. By William Hazlitt.
London: John Warren. M DCCCXXI.   [printed for Henry Colburn and Co.,
MDCCCXXII.]   _8vo, two volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Table-Talk; or, Original Essays on Men and Manners.
Second Edition.   London: Printed for Henry Colburn . . . 1824.   _8vo,
two volumes, russia, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Holloway._


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Liber Amoris; Or, The New Pygmalion.   London.
Printed for John Hunt . . . by C. H. Reynolds . . . 1823.   _12mo,
orange levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by R. W.
Smith._

First edition: engraved title with miniature portrait of Sarah Walker.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--The Spirit of the Age: or Contemporary Portraits.
London: Printed for Henry Colburn . . . 1825.   _8vo, russia, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Holloway._

First edition.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Notes of a Journey through France and Italy . . .
London: printed for Hunt and Clarke, . . . MDCCCXXVI.   _8vo, green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Reprinted from the "Morning Chronicle."


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--The Plain Speaker: Opinions on Books, Men and Things.
   London: Henry Colburn . . . 1826.   _8vo, two volumes, russia, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Holloway._

First edition.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--The Plain Speaker.   1826. _8vo, two volumes, green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--The Life of Napoleon Buonaparte.   By William
Hazlitt. . . . London: printed for Hunt and Clarke, . . . 1828. [-1830.]
   _8vo, four volumes, blue morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Conversations of James Northcote, Esq:, R. A.   By
William Hazlitt   London: Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley . . . 1830.
   _Crown 8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Portrait of Northcote by Wright after Wivell, and (inserted) a second
portrait by Meyer after Jackson, and a mezzotint of Samuel Northcote
Senior by Wivell after Gandy.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Literary Remains of the late William Hazlitt.   With
a Notice of his Life, by his Son, and thoughts on his Genius and
Writings, by E. L. Bulwer . . . and M^{r} Sergeant Talfourd . . . London:
Saunders and Otley . . . 1836.   _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Tout._

First edition: with the portrait by Marr after Bewick.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--Literary Remains.   1836. _8vo, two volumes, green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM.--See Duppa and de Quincy. Montaigne, Michael de.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM CAREW.--Hand-Book to the popular, poetical, and
dramatic Literature of Great Britain, From the Invention of Printing to
the Restoration.   By W. Carew Hazlitt. . . . London: John Russell
Smith, . . . 1867.   _Royal 8vo, sprinkled calf, gilt back and sides,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


HAZLITT, WILLIAM CAREW, _editor_.--Jests, new and old.   Containing
Anecdotes of Celebrities, Living and Deceased, many of which have never
before been published.   Collected and Edited, with preface and index,
by W. Carew Hazlitt.   London: J. W. Jarvis & Son, . . . [1886.]   _8vo,
half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 19 of one hundred copies printed on large hand-made paper,
interleaved.


HAZLITT, WILLIAM CAREW.--A Manual for the Collector and Amateur of Old
English Plays.   Edited from the material formed by Kirkman, Langbaine,
Downes, Oldys, and Halliwell-Phillipps, with extensive additions and
corrections   by W. Carew Hazlitt.   London Pickering & Chatto . . .
1892.   _4to, half cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 172 of two hundred and fifty copies printed.


HEAD, SIR EDMUND.--See Kugler, Franz Theodor.


HEATON, MARY MARGARET.--The History of the Life of Albrecht Duerer of
Nuernberg.   With a translation of his letters and journal, and some
account of his works. By Mrs. Charles Heaton.   London and New York:
Macmillan and Co.   1870. . . . _Royal 8vo, half red levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by W. Matthews._

First edition. Frontispiece portrait and thirty other illustrations.


HEBER, REGINALD.--The Poetical Works of Reginald Heber, late Bishop of
Calcutta.   London: John Murray, . . . M DCCC XLI.   _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

Portrait by E. Finden after T. Phillips.


HEINE, HEINRICH.--Poems by Heinrich Heine translated by Julian Fane.
Not published.   Vienna. From the Imperial Court and Government
Printing-Office.   1854.   _Royal 8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._


HEINE, HEINRICH.--The Love Songs of Heinrich Heine.   Englished by H. B.
Briggs.   London: Truebner & Co., . . . 1888.   _Post 8vo, vellum, uncut
edges._


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--Thoughts in the Cloister and the Crowd. . . .
London: printed for Henry Wix, [by Metcalfe and Palmer, Cambridge] . . .
1835.   _Post 8vo, original boards, uncut edges._

First edition of Helps's first publication, suppressed by the author.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--Essays written in the Intervals of Business   London
   William Pickering   1841. _Post 8vo, original boards, uncut edges._

First edition.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--Essays written in the Intervals of Business   London
   William Pickering   1853. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--King Henry the Second. An historical drama.
London:   William Pickering, 1843.   _Post 8vo, original cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--The Claims of Labour.   An Essay on the Duties of
the Employers to the Employed. The Second edition.   To which is added
An Essay on the means of improving the health and increasing the comfort
of the labouring classes.   London:   William Pickering 1845.   _Post
8vo, half blue morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--Friends in Council: a Series of Readings and
discourse thereon London William Pickering 1847[-59]   _Crown 8vo, four
volumes, Cambridge panelled calf, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

First edition: both series complete.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--(I.) Friends in Council: a Series of Readings and
discourse thereon   London   William Pickering   1849 (II.) Friends in
Council: a Series of Readings and discourse thereon   A new Series . . .
The second edition London John W. Parker and Son, . . . 1859 . . .
_Crown 8vo, four volumes, half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Matthews._


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--The Conquerors of the New World and their bondsmen
being a narrative of the principal events which led to negro slavery in
the West Indies and America   London   William Pickering 1848.   _Crown
8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--Companions of my Solitude London, William Pickering
   1851.   _Post 8vo, half blue morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Matthews._

First edition.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--Oulita the Serf. A Tragedy. London: John W. Parker
and Son, . . . 1858.   _Small 8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition. Thick paper copy.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--Organization in Daily Life. An Essay. London:
Parker, Son, and Bourn, . . . 1862. . . .   _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--Casimir Maremma.   By the author of "Friends in
Council," "Realmah," etc. . . . London: Bell and Daldy, . . . 1870.
_Post 8vo, two volumes, blue morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--The Life of Hernando Cortes.   By Arthur Helps, . . .
London: Bell and Daldy, [Chiswick Press] . . . 1871.   _Crown 8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition: with woodcuts.   Dedicated to Carlyle.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--Conversations on War and General Culture. By the
author of "Friends in Council." London: Smith, Elder and Co., . . .
1871.   _Post 8vo, brown morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges,
by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--Thoughts upon Government   by Arthur Helps   London
   Bell and Daldy . . . 1872 . . . _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--Ivan de Biron or, the Russian Court in the middle of
the last century by the Author of "Friends in Council," etc. . . . W.
Isbister & Co. . . . 1874.   _Crown 8vo, three volumes, red morocco,
gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


HELPS, SIR ARTHUR.--Social Pressure by the author of 'Friends in
Council'   London Daldy, Isbister, & Co. . . . 1875.   _Crown 8vo, blue
morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


HEMANS, FELICIA.--Songs of the Affections, with other poems. By Felicia
Hemans . . . W. Blackwood, Edinburgh; and T. Cadell, Strand, London.
MDCCCXXX.   _12mo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

Presentation copy from Mrs. Hemans to William Wordsworth, with
inscription by the author and two autographs of Wordsworth.


HEMANS, FELICIA.--Poems by Felicia Hemans. William Blackwood and Sons,
Edinburgh . . . 1859-[-54]. _Foolscap 8vo, six volumes in three, red
morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges._


HENDERSON, WILLIAM.--My Life as an Angler by William Henderson. London:
W. Satchell, Peyton & Co. . . 1879.   _Royal 8vo, blue levant morocco,
gilt back and side panels with branches of leaves, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Rousselle._

Portrait and sixty-seven woodcut illustrations by E. Evans, and head and
tail pieces by Mrs. Henderson.

Large paper copy, with the full-page illustrations on India paper.


HENLEY, WILLIAM ERNEST.--A Book of Verses By William Ernest Henley
[etched vignette] London: Published by David Nutt . . . 1888.   _8vo,
original boards, uncut._

First edition.   One of seventy large paper copies printed. Inserted is
an autograph letter from Henley.


HENLEY, WILLIAM ERNEST.--See Farmer and Henley.


HENRYSON, ROBERT.--The Poems and Fables of Robert Henryson, now first
collected. With notes, and a memoir of his life. By David Laing.
[vignette] Edinburgh: M DCCC LXV. William Paterson, . . . _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


HERBERT, HENRY WILLIAM.--Frank Forester's Horse and Horsemanship of the
United States and British Provinces of North America.   By Henry William
Herbert, . . . With steel-engraved original portraits of celebrated
horses. . . . New York: Stringer & Townsend, . . . 1857.   _4to, two
volumes, red levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by Joly._

Large paper copy.   Frontispiece-titles on India paper engraved by R.
Hinshelwood after F. O. C. Darley, sixteen plates, also on India paper,
and numerous woodcuts.


HERBERT, WILLIAM.--See Dibdin,   T. F. Typographical Antiquities.


HERO OF ALEXANDRIA.--The Pneumatics of Hero of Alexandria   from the
original Greek translated for and edited by Bennet Woodcroft . . .
London Taylor Walton and Maberly . . . 1851.   _4to, cloth, uncut
edges._

Seventy-eight illustrations.


HERODOTUS.--History of Herodotus. A new English version, edited with
copious notes and appendices, illustrating the history and geography of
Herodotus, from the most recent sources of information; and embodying
the chief results, historical and ethnographical, which have been
obtained in the progress of cuneiform and hieroglyphical discovery.   By
George Rawlinson . . . assisted by Col. Sir Henry Rawlinson . . . and
Sir J. G. Wilkinson . . . with maps and illustrations. London: John
Murray . . . 1862.   _8vo, four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


HEROIC EPISTLE.--An Heroic Epistle to the Right Honourable Lord Viscount
Sackville. . . . London: printed for G. Kearsley, . . . 1783.   _4to,
paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._

The dedication is dated Oxford, December 5, 1782. Contains half-title.


HERSCHEL, SIR JOHN F. W.--A Treatise on Astronomy.   By Sir John F. W.
Herschel, . . . New Edition.   [vignette]   London:   printed for
Longman, Brown, Green & Longmans, . . . [n. d.]   _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

Engraved title by E. Finden after H. Corbould, and numerous woodcuts in
the text.

Edmund Waller's copy, with his autograph and book-plate.


HERVEY, JAMES.--Meditations and Contemplations. By the Revd. James
Hervey . . . To which is prefixed the Life of the Author.   [vignettes
after Corbould] London.   Printed for T. Heptinstall . . . 1796.
_Royal 8vo, two volumes, red morocco, gilt back and sides, inside
linings with gold borders, gilt edges, by Hering, with his ticket._

Portrait of the author, in colours, and twelve plates after designs by
Corbould, Ibbetson, and others.


HERVEY, JOHN, LORD.--A Satire In the Manner of Persius: in a Dialogue
between Atticus and Eugenio. By a Person of Quality.   London: Printed
for J. Clarke, . . . and J. Robinson . . . MDCC.XXXIX. . . . _Folio,
paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._


HEWITT, JOHN.--A Tutor for the Beaus: or Love in a Labyrinth.   A
Comedy, As it is acted at the Theatre Royal in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields.
Written by Mr Hewitt. . . . London: Printed for, and sold by Ward and
Chandler, . . . M. DCC. XXXVII.   _8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


HEWLETT, JOSEPH THOMAS JAMES.--Peter Priggins, the College Scout.   [By
J. T. Hewlett]   Edited by Theodore Hook, Esq.   In three volumes.
With [12] illustrations by Phiz.   [Hablot K. Browne] . . . London:
Henry Colburn, publisher, . . . 1841.   _12mo, three volumes, blue
figured silk, uncut edges._

First edition.   The Advertisement, signed T. E. H., is dated "Athenaeum,
December 17, 1840."


HICKS, THOMAS.--Eulogy on Thomas Crawford by Thomas Hicks . . . New York
privately printed for subscribers   1865. _8vo, half green morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges._

One of seventy copies printed.   Portrait and three illustrations.


HIGGONS, BEVILL.--The Generous Conquerour: or, the Timely Discovery. A
Tragedy; As it is Acted at the Theatre Royal, by His Majesty's
Servants. Written by Bevill Higgons, Esq; [Two lines from Juvenal]
London: Printed for S. Briscoe, and Sold by J. Nutt, near
Stationer's-Hall, 1702.   _4to, half brown morocco._

First edition.   A-L in fours, title on A1. Dedication to the Marquis of
Normanby, Prologue by George Granville, Lord Lansdowne.


HILDEBURN, CHARLES R.--Sketches of Printers and Printing in Colonial New
York   by Charles R. Hildeburn with numerous illustrations.   New York
Dodd, Mead & Company 1895.   _12mo, boards, uncut edges._

Three etched portraits and twenty-eight facsimiles of title-pages.
Three hundred and seventy-five copies printed.


HILL, AARON.--Elfrid: or, the Fair Inconstant. A Tragedy: As it is Acted
at the Theatre Royal, by Her Majesty's Servants.   To which is Added
the Walking Statue: or, the Devil in the Wine-Cellar. A Farce. Written
by Mr. Hill. . . . London, Printed for Bernard Lintott, . . . and Egbert
Sanger . . . [1710].   _4to, brown levant morocco, gilt back, side
corners, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A1-A4, a1-a2, and B-1 in fours. Dedicated to the Marquis
of Kent.   Rewritten in 1731 under the title of "Athelwold."


HILL, AARON.--The Dramatic Works of Aaron Hill . . . London: printed for
Thomas Lownds . . . MDCCLX.   _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt
edges, by Bedford._

Contains a Life of the author by "I. K.," a list of Subscribers,
seventeen Plays, and seven Love-letters.


HILL, AARON.--Dramatic Works 1760.   _8vo, two volumes, old red morocco,
gilt back and sides, gilt edges._

Thick paper copy.


HILL, JOHN.--The Story of Elizabeth Canning considered By Dr. Hill. With
Remarks on what has been called, A Clear State of her Case, by Mr.
Fielding; and Answers to the several Arguments and Suppositions of
that Writer.   London: Printed for M. Cooper, . . . 1753.   [Price One
Shilling.]   _8vo, brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges.
Bound with FIELDING'S "Clear State of the Case of Elizabeth Canning."_


HILL, NATHANIEL.--The ancient poem of Guillaume de Guileville entitled
Le Pelerinage de l'Homme compared with the Pilgrim's Progress of John
Bunyan edited from notes collected by the late Mr. Nathaniel Hill of the
Royal Society of Literature with illustrations and an appendix. London
Basil Montagu Pickering . . . 1858. _4to, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Bunyan and numerous illustrations in facsimile from old
manuscripts and woodcuts.


HILL, THOMAS.--See Griffiths, A. F.


HILLHOUSE, MARGARET P.--The White Rose Knight and other poems by
Margaret P. Hillhouse   New York   Privately Printed at the De Vinne
Press 1894.   _16mo, cloth, uncut edges._

Two hundred copies printed.


HIPKINS AND GIBB.--Musical Instruments Historic, Rare and Unique the
selection, introduction and descriptive notes by A. J. Hipkins, . . .
illustrated by a series of fifty plates in colours drawn by William Gibb
   Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black M DCCC LXXXVIII. _Folio, half red
levant morocco, gilt edges._

One thousand and forty copies printed.


HOCHSCHILD, BARON.--Desiree Queen of Sweden and Norway translated from
the French of Baron Hochschild by Mrs. M. Carey   New York Dodd, Mead &
Company [De Vinne Press] 1890.   _12mo, half cloth, uncut edges._

No. 30 of two hundred copies printed.


HODGKIN, JOHN ELIOT.--[** symbol] Rariora being notes of some of the
printed books, manuscripts, historical documents, medals, engravings,
pottery, etc., etc., collected (1858-1900) by John Eliot Hodgkin, . . .
[65 illustrations] London: Sampson Low, Marston & Company, . . . [n. d.]
   _Royal 4to, three volumes, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


HOE, ROBERT.--A Lecture on Bookbinding as a Fine Art, delivered before
the Grolier Club, February 26, 1885. With sixty-three illustrations. By
Robert Hoe. New York: published by the Grolier Club MDCCCLXXXVI. _4to,
red levant morocco, gilt back and sides elaborately tooled in the manner
of Padeloup, doubled with olive morocco, dentelle border, gilt over
uncut edges, by Cuzin._

Printed upon vellum.


HOE, ROBERT.--A Lecture on Bookbinding. 1886. _4to, red levant morocco,
back panels and side borders in a gilt and mosaic design of green and
ivory morocco, tooled in scrolls and fleurons, doubled with vellum, gilt
over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy printed upon vellum, with the plates on satin.


[HOE, ROBERT.]--One hundred and seventy-six historic and artistic
Book-Bindings dating from the fifteenth century to the present time
pictured by etchings, artotypes, and lithographs after the originals
selected from the library of Robert Hoe . . . Dodd, Mead & Company, . . .
[The De Vinne Press] 1895.   _4to, two volumes, brown levant morocco,
gilt back, side fillets, doubled with red morocco, corner ornaments of
scrolls azure tooled, gilt over uncut edges, by Mercier._

The text is on Japan paper, the illustrations on vellum, and the only
set so printed.


HOFLAND, THOMAS CHRISTOPHER.--The British Angler's Manual, or the Art of
Angling in England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland: with some account of
the principal rivers, lakes and trout-streams, in the United Kingdom;
with instructions in fly-fishing, trolling, and angling at the bottom,
and more particularly for the trout. By T. C. Hofland, Esq. Embellished
with numerous engravings on steel and wood, from original pictures and
drawings by the author. London: Published by Whitehead and Compy: . . .
MDCCCXXXIX.   _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Pratt._

Large paper copy of the first edition. Fourteen steel plates on India
paper.


HOFLAND, BARBARA.--See Turner and Girtin.


HOGARTH, GEORGE.--Memoirs of the Musical Drama.   By George Hogarth, . . .
London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1838. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

Eight portraits.


HOGARTH, WILLIAM.--The Analysis of Beauty. Written With a view of fixing
the fluctuating Ideas of Taste. By William Hogarth. . . . A new edition.
London: Printed by W. Strahan, for Mrs. Hogarth, And Sold by her at her
House in Leicester-fields. M DCC LXXII. _4to, half red levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Frontispiece and two folded plates, the second in its original state.
D'Israeli, in his "Curiosities of Literature," 1834, Volume V, p. 237,
says, "We know that Dr. Morell wrote the 'Analysis of Beauty' for
Hogarth."


HOGARTH AND IRELAND.--Hogarth Illustrated. By John Ireland . . . Pub:
June 1. 1791, by J. E. J. Boydell . . . A Supplement to Hogarth
Illustrated; compiled from his Original Manuscripts, in the possession
of John Ireland . . . London: published, March, 1798. For the Author . . .
_Royal 8vo, three volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back and side
panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

First edition.   Presentation copy from the author, on large paper, with
three autograph letters and memoranda. In addition to the sixty-six
plates proper to the first two volumes, seventeen duplicates, proofs
before letters, have been inserted, and three extra plates, including a
rare portrait of Hogarth. The Supplement has forty plates.


HOGARTH AND IRELAND.--Graphic Illustrations of Hogarth from Pictures,
Drawings, and Scarce Prints, in the possession of Samuel Ireland, author
of this work . . . London: published for Samuel Ireland; by R. Faulder,
. . . T. Egerton, . . . and B. White, . . . 1799.   _4to, two volumes,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Ireland's own copy on large paper, with two hundred and seventeen plates
in two, three, and four states, including impressions in black, brown,
and colour, first etchings, signed proofs, etc.


HOGARTH, WILLIAM.--The Genuine Works of William Hogarth; with
Biographical Anecdotes, By John Nichols, . . . and the late George
Steevens, . . . Volume III. containing Clavis Hogarthiana, and other
illustrative essays: with fifty additional plates. London: printed by
and for Nichols, Son, and Bentley, . . . 1817. _4to, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Large paper copy.   Volume III of the Genuine Works, 1808-1817, which is
"supplementary and often deficient."


HOGARTH, WILLIAM.--Hogarth Moralized; a complete edition of all the most
capital and admired Works of William Hogarth, accompanied with concise
and comprehensive explanations of their moral tendency, by the late Rev.
Dr. Trusler, an Introduction and many additional Notes. London: Printed
at the Shakespeare Press . . . for John Major . . . 1831. _Crown 8vo,
half citron levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Cuzin._

Fifty-seven copper-plate illustrations, proofs on India paper, and
twelve woodcuts.


HOGARTH, WILLIAM.--Anecdotes of William Hogarth, written by himself:
with Essays on his Life and Genius, and Criticisms on his Works,
selected from Walpole, Gilpin, J. Ireland, Lamb, Phillips, and others To
which are added a Catalogue of his Prints; [edited by J. B. Nichols]
accounts of their variations and principal copies; lists of Paintings,
Drawings, &c   London: J. B. Nichols and Son . . . 1833.   _8vo, red
levant morocco, quintuple and septuple fillet on back panels and sides,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Joly._

Forty-eight plates.


HOGG, THOMAS JEFFERSON.--The Life of Percy Bysshe Shelley by Thomas
Jefferson Hogg.   London: Edward Moxon . . . 1858.   _Crown 8vo, two
volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

Portrait and woodcuts.


HOLBEIN, HANS.--Icones Veteris Testamenti; Illustrations of the Old
Testament, engraved on wood, from designs by Hans Holbein.   London:
William Pickering 1830.   _Crown 8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Printed on heavy India paper. Ninety woodcut illustrations.


HOLBEIN, HANS.--See Dance of Death.


HOLCROFT, THOMAS.--Love's Frailties: a comedy in five acts, as performed
at the Theatre Royal, Covent-Garden. By Thomas Holcroft.   London:
printed for Shepperson and Reynolds, . . . 1794.   _8vo, red morocco,
gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


HOLMES, EDWARD.--The Life of Mozart, including his correspondence. By
Edward Holmes, . . . London: Chapman and Hall . . . 1845.   _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


HOLMES, EDWARD.--The Life of Mozart including his correspondence by
Edward Holmes . . . a new edition, with notes by Ebenezer Prout. London:
Novello, Ewer & Co., . . . 1878.   _8vo, cloth._


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL, AND OTHERS.--The Harbinger; a May-Gift. Boston:
Carter, Hendee and Co. MDCCCXXXIII.   _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by David._

First edition. In three parts: I by Park Benjamin, II by Holmes, III by
John Osborne Sargent.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--Poems. By Oliver Wendell Holmes.   Boston:
Otis, Broaders, and Company. New York: George Dearborn and Company. M
DCCC XXXVI.   _12mo, red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition. A tall copy, measuring 7-7/8 inches in height.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--Urania: a rhymed lesson. By Oliver Wendell
Holmes. Pronounced before the Mercantile Library Association, October
14, 1846.   Boston: William D. Ticknor & Company. M DCCC XLVI.   _8vo,
original paper wrappers._

First edition.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--Urania. 1846. _8vo, original paper wrappers._

Another copy, printed upon large paper. Presentation copy from the
author.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--Poems by Oliver Wendell Holmes.   New and
enlarged edition.   Boston: Ticknor, Reed & Fields. MDCCCXLIX.   _16mo,
red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

Contains prefatory note, "The author to the publishers," and nine poems,
including Urania, now first collected.

This edition contains 286 pages and two leaves of advertisements dated
January 1, 1849. There is an edition of the same year with 272 pages.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--Astraea: the balance of illusions. A poem
delivered before the Phi Beta Kappa Society of Yale College, August 14,
1850, by Oliver Wendell Holmes . . . Boston: Ticknor, Reed, and Fields.
   MDCCCL.   _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by David._

First edition.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table . . .
Boston Phillips, Sampson and Company MDCCCLVIII.   _12mo, brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by David._

First issue of the first edition, with woodcut half-title, which was
omitted from a large portion of the edition, and from all later issues,
and eight other illustrations, engraved on wood after the designs of
Hoppin.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--The Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table. 1858.
_12mo, brown levant morocco, gilt back with mosaic centre, gilt over
untrimmed edges, by Riviere._

Second issue of the first edition, without the woodcut half-title. Eight
illustrations by Hoppin.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--The Autocrat of the Breakfast-table. . . .
Boston: Phillips, Sampson and Company MDCCCLIX.   _8vo, red levant
morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Large paper copy, with eight illustrations after Hoppin. Presentation
copy to George A. Bethune.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--The Professor at the Breakfast-Table; with the
Story of Iris.   By Oliver Wendell Holmes . . . Boston: Ticknor and
Fields . . . MDCCCLX.   _12mo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by David._

First edition.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--Elsie Venner: a Romance of Destiny. By Oliver
Wendell Holmes   Boston: Ticknor and Fields MDCCCLXI.   _12mo, two
volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over untrimmed edges, by
Riviere._

First edition.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--The Poet at the Breakfast-Table. His talks with
his fellow-boarders and the reader.   Boston: James R. Osgood and
Company, . . . 1872.   _12mo, blue morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Stikeman._

First edition, with a woodcut frontispiece.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--Songs of Many Seasons.   1862-1874.   By Oliver
Wendell Holmes. Boston: James R. Osgood and Company, . . . 1875. _12mo,
original cloth._

First edition.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--The Iron Gate, and other poems.   By Oliver
Wendell Holmes.   Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Company. . . . 1880.
_12mo, original cloth, gilt top._

First edition. Portrait by J. A. J. Wilcox.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--Grandmother's Story of Bunker Hill Battle.   by
Oliver Wendell Holmes. Illustrated by H. W. McVicar   Imprinted at New
York by Dodd, Mead & Company [1883].   _4to red morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt top, by Matthews._

The thirty illustrations printed in colour are accompanied in each case
by the original drawing.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--Medical Essays 1842-1882 by Oliver Wendell
Holmes.   Second edition. Boston, Houghton, Mifflin and Company . . .
1883. _Crown 8vo, half brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Bradstreet's._

HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--Pages from an Old Volume of Life.   A
Collection of Essays 1857-1881 by Oliver Wendell Holmes   Boston,
Houghton Mifflin and Company . . . 1884.   _Crown 8vo, half brown
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bradstreet's._


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--A Mortal Antipathy. First Opening of the New
Portfolio by Oliver Wendell Holmes.   Fourth edition.   Boston,
Houghton, Mifflin and Company . . . 1886.   _Crown 8vo, half brown
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bradstreet's._

HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--The Poetical Works of Oliver Wendell Holmes
Household Edition   with illustrations   Boston, Houghton, Mifflin and
Company . . . 1886.   _Crown 8vo, half brown morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Bradstreet's._

HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--Before the Curfew and other poems, chiefly
occasional   by Oliver Wendell Holmes   Boston . . . Houghton, Mifflin
and Company . . . 1888.   _16mo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.--Dorothy Q   Together with A Ballad of the
Boston Tea Party & Grandmother's Story of Bunker Hill Battle   By Oliver
Wendell Holmes   With Illustrations by Howard Pyle   Cambridge Printed
at the Riverside Press MDCCCXCIII.   _8vo, vellum, gilt top, uncut
edges._

First separate edition, two hundred and fifty copies printed.


HOME, JOHN.--(I.) Douglas: a Tragedy. As it is acted at the
Theatre-Royal in Covent-Garden. [One line in Latin]   Edinburgh: Printed
for G. Hamilton & J. Balfour, W. Gray & W. Peter.   M, DCC, LVII.
[Price One Shilling Sixpence.]   (II.) The Morality of Stage-Plays
seriously considered.   Edinburgh: M, DCC, LVII. (Price Sixpence.)
(III.) An Argument To prove that the Tragedy of Douglas Ought to be
Publickly burnt by the hands of the Hangman. [Six lines in English]
Edinburgh: printed in the Year M, DCC, LVII.   [Price Three pence.]
_8vo, three works in one volume, brown levant morocco, side panels, gilt
top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition of Douglas.   One leaf (half-title) and A1 (title)--K2 in
fours. Originally produced in Edinburgh in 1756.


HOME, JOHN.--(I.) Douglas: a Tragedy. As it is acted at the
Theatre-Royal in Covent-Garden. [One line in Latin] London: Printed for
A. Millar, . . . MDCCLVII.   (II.) Agis: a Tragedy. As it is acted at
the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane.   London: Printed for A. Millar, . . .
MDCCLVIII.   _8vo, two volumes in one, red morocco, gilt back, wide
border on the sides, gilt edges._

First edition of Agis, and first London edition of Douglas. Douglas:
A1-A4 and B-F4 in eights, blank leaf, A1, title on A2. Agis: A1-A2 and
B-F4 in eights, title on A1.


HOME, JOHN.--Alonzo. A tragedy. In five acts, As it is performed at the
Theatre-Royal, Drury Lane. . . . London: Printed for T. Becket, . . . M
DCC LXXIII. _8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


HOMER.--(I.) The Iliad of Homer engraved from the Compositions of Iohn
Flaxman R. A. Scvlptor, London, [vignette]   London: Printed for
Longman, Hurst &c . . . March 1, 1805.   (II.) The Odyssey of Homer
engraved from the Compositions of Iohn Flaxman . . . 1803.   _Oblong
quarto, two works in one volume, half cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

The Iliad consists of an engraved title and thirty-nine plates. Inserted
is a portrait of Flaxman by R. Woodman after John Jackson, a proof on
India paper.

The Odyssey consists of an engraved title and thirty-four plates, all
proofs before letter, with the exception of Nos. 7 and 26. Inserted is a
portrait of Flaxman by W. C. Edwards after Jackson.


HOMER.--The Iliad of Homer translated by T. S. Brandreth Esq. . . .
London   William Pickering   1846. _Post 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._


HOMER.--The Iliad of Homer rendered into English blank verse.   By
Edward Earl of Derby. . . . Fifth edition, revised.   London: John
Murray, . . . 1865. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


HOMER.--See Garnett, Richard. Pope, Alexander.


HONE, WILLIAM, _editor_.--[Select Trials] London: printed for William
Hone, . . . 1815 [-1816] _8vo, five parts in one volume, half olive
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

These trials consist of the "Case of Elizabeth Fenning," by John
Watkins, 1815, "The Important Trials at Kingston Assizes," 1816, the
"Trial of Captain Harrower" for bigamy, 1816, the "Four Trials of the
Thief Takers," 1816, and the "History of the Memorable Blood
Conspiracy," 1816.


HONE, WILLIAM.--The Apocryphal New Testament, being all The Gospels,
Epistles, and other pieces now extant, attributed in the first four
centuries to Jesus Christ, his apostles, and their companions, and not
included in the New Testament, by its compilers. Translated, and now
first collected into one volume, with prefaces and tables, and various
notes and references. Third Edition.   London: printed for William Hone,
. . . 1821. _8vo, half olive morocco, gilt top, uncut edges. Bound with
HONE'S "Ancient Mysteries" and another work._


HONE, WILLIAM.--Ancient Mysteries described, especially the English
Miracle Plays, founded on Apocryphal New Testament Story, extant among
the unpublished manuscripts in the British Museum; including notices of
Ecclesiastical Shows, the festivals of Fools and Asses--The English Boy
Bishop.--The Descent into Hell--The Lord Mayor's Show.   The Guildhall
Giants--Christmas Carols, &c.   By William Hone.   With engravings on
copper and wood . . . London: printed for William Hone, . . . 1823.
_8vo, half olive morocco, gilt top, uncut edges. Bound with two other
works._

First edition, with the plate of Gog and Magog coloured.


HONE, WILLIAM.--The Every-day Book; or Everlasting Calendar of popular
amusements, . . . forming a complete history of the year, months, &
seasons, and a perpetual key to the almanack; . . . by William Hone. . . .
[320 woodcuts]   London: published for William Hone, by Hunt and
Clarke, . . . 1826 [-1827].   _8vo, two volumes, half olive morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition. Dedication to Charles Lamb, dated May 5, 1826.


HONE, WILLIAM.--The Table Book; by William Hone . . . London: published
for William Hone, by Hunt and Clarke, . . . 1827. [-'28.]   _8vo, two
volumes in one, half olive morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition. One hundred and sixteen woodcut engravings.


HONE, WILLIAM.--Full Annals of the Revolution in France, 1830.   Illegal
ordinances of Charles X. &c . . . By William Hone.   Illustrated with
engravings. London: printed for Thomas Tegg, . . . 1830.   _8vo, half
olive morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

In the same volume are Curran's Speeches, 1819, "Tributes of the Public
Press to the memory of the late Mr. Whitbread," 1815, with portrait by
T. Blood after Opie, "An Authentic Account of the late Mr. Whitbread,"
by Francis Phippen, third edition, 1815, the Speech of Mr. Phillips in
the case of Guthrie v. Sterne, 1816, "fifteenth genuine edition," and
"Authentic Memoirs of the Life and Death of the Right Honourable R. B.
Sheridan," 1816, with portrait by Harwood.


HONE, WILLIAM.--The Year Book of daily recreation and information,
concerning remarkable men and manners, times and seasons, solemnities
and merrymakings, antiquities and novelties: on the plan of the
Every-Day Book and Table Book, . . . forming a complete history of the
year; and a perpetual key to the almanac.   By William Hone. . . . With
one hundred and fourteen engravings.   London: printed for Thomas Tegg,
. . . 1832. . . . _8vo, half olive morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


HOOD, THOMAS.--The Plea of the Midsummer Fairies, Hero and Leander,
Lycus the Centaur, and other poems By Thomas Hood . . . London: printed
for Longman . . . 1827.   _Crown 8vo, half green morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


HOOD, THOMAS.--Whims and Oddities, in Prose and Verse; with forty
original designs, by Thomas Hood . . . fourth edition.   London: Lupton
Relfe . . . 1829 [Charles Tilt . . . -MDCCC XXVII].   _12mo, two
volumes, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Both series, the second being the first issue, as indicated by dates
given above. Each volume contains forty illustrations.


HOOD, THOMAS.--National Tales. By Thomas Hood . . . London: William H.
Ainsworth . . . MDCCCXXVII.   _12mo, two volumes, half green morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition, with eight lithographic plates by T. Dighton. One of the
few books issued by the author-publisher, Ainsworth.


HOOD, THOMAS.--Hood's Own: or Laughter from Year to Year.   Being former
runnings of his comic vein, with an infusion of new blood for general
circulation [second volume] being a further collection of his wit and
humour, with a preface by his Son.   Second Series   London: A. H. Baily
and C^{o}. . . . MDCCCXXXIX. Edward Moxon & Co. . . . 1861.   _8vo, two
volumes, half green levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

First edition. Steel portrait by W. Holl after Lewis, and many hundred
punning woodcut illustrations.


HOOD, THOMAS.--Poems of Wit and Humour. By Thomas Hood.   Ninth edition.
   London: Edward Moxon & Co., . . . 1860.   _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


HOOD, THOMAS.--Poems by Thomas Hood. Twelfth edition.   London: Edward
Moxon & Co., . . . 1860.   _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Bust portrait by F. A. Heath after E. Davis.


HOOD, THOMAS.--The Poetical Works of Thomas Hood.   With some Account of
the Author. . . . Boston: Little, Brown, and Company.   1866.   _12mo,
five volumes, half green cloth, uncut edges._

No. 13 of one hundred copies printed, with portrait by H. W. Smith on
India paper.


HOOD, THOMAS.--Humorous Poems   by Thomas Hood   with a preface by
Alfred Ainger and one hundred and thirty illustrations by Charles E.
Brock   London Macmillan and Co. . . . 1893 . . . _Royal 8vo, buckram,
uncut edges._

One of two hundred and fifty large paper copies printed.


HOOK, THEODORE.--Tentamen;   or, an Essay towards the History of
Whittington Some time Lord Mayor of London.   By Vicesimus Blinkinsop.
London: printed for William Wright . . . 1820.   _Foolscap 8vo, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

A bitter satire on Alderman Wood and Queen Caroline, which was
suppressed.


HOOK, THEODORE.--Sayings and Doings. A Series of Sketches from Life. . . .
[Second Series.   Third Series.] London   printed for Henry Colburn, . . .
1824. [1825. 1828.]   _Crown 8vo, nine volumes, tree calf, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Ramage._

First edition.


HOOK, THEODORE.--See Barham, R. H. D. Foote, Samuel.   Hewlett, J. T.


HOPE, THOMAS.--Costume of the Ancients.   By Thomas Hope. . . . [200
plates] London: printed for William Miller, . . . 1809. _Royal 8vo, two
volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Allo._

First edition, large paper copy.


HOPE, THOMAS.--Anastasius: or, Memoirs of a Greek; written at the close
of the eighteenth century. . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1819.
_Post 8vo, three volumes, Spanish calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


HOPE, THOMAS.--An Essay on the Origin and Prospects of Man.   By Thomas
Hope.   London: John Murray . . . 1831.   _8vo, three volumes, calf,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


HOPER, MRS.--Queen Tragedy restor'd: a Dramatick Entertainment.
London: Printed for W. Owen, . . . M DCC XLIX.   _8vo, morocco, by The
Club Bindery._


HORACE.--The Epodes, Satires, and Epistles of Horace.   Translated by
the late Rev. Francis Howes, . . . London William Pickering 1845.
_Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


HORACE.--The Works of Quintus Horatius Flaccus, illustrated chiefly from
the Remains of Ancient Art. With a Life by the Rev. Henry Hart Milman
&c.   London: John Murray   MDCCCXLIX.   _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt
back and sides, gilt over uncut edges._

Every leaf surrounded with a coloured border of different design, and
eight title-pages similarly treated by Owen Jones, and over three
hundred woodcut illustrations from drawings by George Scharf, Jr.


HORACE.--The Odes of Horace, translated into English verse, with a Life
and Notes by Theodore Martin.   London:   John W. Parker and Son . . .
MDCCCLX.   _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges,
by Allo._

Large paper copy.


[HORN-BOOK.] Printed in Aberdene, by E. Rabau. [n. d.]   _Folio, red
straight-grain morocco, by The Club Bindery._

The original leaf, unfolded, as it came from the press.   Four pages
printed in black-letter, containing the alphabet and the Lord's Prayer.


HORNE, HERBERT P.--The Binding of Books   An Essay in the History of
Gold-Tooled Bindings   By Herbert P. Horne   London   Kegan Paul, . . .
M DCCC XCIV.   _8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

No. 18 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies, with twelve plates
on Japan paper.


HORNE, RICHARD HARTWELL.--Orion an epic poem.   In Three Books   By R.
H. Horne   London   J. Miller . . . MDCCCXLIII.   _8vo, original covers,
uncut edges._

Published at one farthing.


HORNE, THOMAS HARTWELL.--An Introduction to the Study of Bibliography,
to which is prefixed a Memoir on the Public Libraries of the Antients by
Thomas Hartwell Horne.   London:   printed by G. Woodfall for T. Cadell
and W. Davies 1814.   _Royal 8vo, two volumes, half blue levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Large and thick paper copy. Illustrated by numerous facsimiles, and
(inserted) portraits of Gutenberg, Aldus and Paulus Manutius, Caxton,
etc.


HORNE, THOMAS HARTWELL.--An Introduction to the critical study and
Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures. By the Rev. Thomas Hartwell Horne . . .
Eleventh edition, revised, corrected, and brought down to the present
time.   Edited by the Rev. Thomas Hartwell Horne, B. D. (the author) the
Rev. John Ayre . . . and Samuel Prideaux Tregelles . . . Illustrated
with maps and facsimiles of biblical manuscripts.   London: Longman,
Green . . . 1863.   _8vo, four volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt over uncut
edges, by Pratt._


HORSMANDEN, DANIEL.--A Journal of the Proceedings in The Detection of
the Conspiracy formed by Some White People, in Conjunction with Negro
and other Slaves, for Burning the City of New-York in America, And
Murdering the Inhabitants.

which Conspiracy was partly put in Execution, by Burning his
Majesty's House in Fort George, within the said City, on
Wednesday the Eighteenth of March, 1741. and setting Fire to
several Dwelling and other Houses there, within a few Days
succeeding, And by another Attempt made in Prosecution of the same
infernal Scheme, by putting Fire between two other Dwelling-Houses
within the said City, on the Fifteenth Day of February, 1742; which
was accidentally and timely discovered and extinguished.
Containing,

I. A Narrative of the Trials, Condemnations, Executions, and Behaviour
of the several Criminals, at the Gallows and Stake, with their
Speeches and Confessions; . . .

II. An Appendix, wherein is set forth some additional evidence
concerning the said Conspiracy and Conspirators, . . .

III. Lists of the several Persons (Whites and Blacks) committed on
Account of the Conspiracy; . . . By the Recorder of the City of
New-York. . . . New York: Printed by James Parker, at the New
Printing-Office, 1744. _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back and sides,
gilt top, uncut edges, in a brown levant morocco case, by Bedford._

On page 141 the running head-line is misprinted "Journal of the
Proceedings against" instead of "The Conspirators at New-York,
1741." Page 144 is misprinted "Conspirators" etc., instead of
"Journal." On page 51 "1741" is misprinted "171," and misprinted "1471"
on pages 67, 75, 85, 93, 97, 109, 113, 121, 129, 143, and 151. There
were two issues of this book, the variations of which occur in the
running head-lines.


HOTTEN, JOHN CAMDEN.--See Larwood, Jacob.


HOUGHTON, RICHARD MONCKTON MILNES, LORD.--The Poems of Richard Monckton
Milnes [Lord Houghton] . . . Poems of Many Years [and] Memorials of a
Residence on the Continent   London: Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXXXVIII.
_Small 4to, two volumes in one, citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
over uncut edges, by Allo._

Guizot's copy on large paper(?).


HOUGHTON, LORD.--Poems of Many Years. By Richard Monckton Milnes.   A
new edition.   London: Edward Moxon, . . . MDCCCXLIV.   _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


HOUGHTON, LORD.--Poems, legendary and historical. By Richard Monckton
Milnes.   A new edition. London: Edward Moxon, . . . M DCCC XLIV.
_Post 8vo, boards, uncut edges._


HOWARD, EDWARD.--Rattlin, the Reefer.   [By Edward Howard]   Edited by
the author of "Peter Simple." [Captain Marryat]   Second edition.
London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1836.   _8vo, three volumes, green
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First illustrated edition, with nine plates by A. Hervieu.


HOWARD, EDWARD.--Outward Bound; or A Merchant's Adventures.   By the
author of "Rattlin, the Reefer," &c. London: Henry Colburn, . . . 1838.
   _Post 8vo, three volumes, dark green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges,
by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


HOWARD, FRANK.--The Spirit of the Plays of Shakespeare.   Exhibited in a
Series of outline plates illustrative of the Story of each Play. Drawn
and engraved by Frank Howard. With quotations and descriptions
London: Printed for T. Caddell &c . . . 1833. _4to, five volumes, half
green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, with four hundred and eighty-three plates, proofs on
India paper.


HOWARD, FRANK.--Colour, as a means of art, being an adaptation of the
experience of Professors to the practice of Amateurs.   By Frank Howard,
. . . London: Joseph Thomas, . . . 1838. _12mo, original cloth, uncut
edges._

Seventeen coloured plates.


HOWARD, FRANK.--The Science of Drawing being a progressive series of the
characteristic forms of nature . . . By Frank Howard . . . London
William Pickering   1839 [-1840].   _Foolscap 8vo, three volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

Fifty-one plates.


HOWARD, MONTAGUE.--Old London Silver its History, its Makers and its
Marks   by Montague Howard   With two hundred illustrations, and over
four thousand facsimiles of makers' marks and hall-marks   Charles
Scribner's Sons   New York   [The De Vinne Press] . . . 1903.   _4to,
green morocco, gilt border on the sides, gilt top._


HOWEL, LAURENCE.--The Orthodox Communicant, by way of Meditation on the
Order for the Administration of the Lord's-Supper, or Holy Communion;
According to the Liturgy of the Church of England. London.   Engraven by
J. Sturt . . . [n. d.]   _Small 8vo, red levant morocco, back and sides
elaborately tooled, gilt over rough edges, by F. Bedford._

Ninety-one pages, engraved throughout, and embellished with vignettes
representing scenes in the life of Christ.


HOWITT, WILLIAM.--Visits to Remarkable Places: Old Halls, Battle Fields,
and scenes illustrative of striking passages in English history and
poetry. By William Howitt, . . . the illustrations designed and executed
by Samuel Williams. London: Longman . . . M.DCCC.XL [-XLII.]   _8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition of both series.


HOWITT, WILLIAM.--The Student-life of Germany: by William Howitt, from
the unpublished ms. of Dr. Cornelius.   Containing nearly forty of the
most famous student songs, with the original music, adapted to the
piano-forte, by the Herr Winkelmeyer.   Illustrated with engravings by
Sargent, Woods, and other eminent artists,   [vignette]   London:
Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans.   1841.   _8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

Seven steel plates by J. Woods and twenty-four woodcuts by G. F.
Sargent.


HOWITT, WILLIAM.--The Rural Life of England. By William Howitt, . . .
[vignette] Third edition, corrected and revised.   With [27]
illustrations on wood by Bewick and S. Williams.   London: Longman,
Brown, Green, and Longmans.   1844.   _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


HOYT, E.--Antiquarian Researches: comprising a History of the Indian
Wars in the Country bordering Connecticut River and parts adjacent, and
other interesting events, from the first landing of the Pilgrims, to the
Conquest of Canada by the English, in 1760: with notices of Indian
depredations in the neighbouring country: and of the first planting and
progress of settlements in New England, New York and Canada.   By E.
Hoyt, Esq. Greenfield, Mass.   Printed by Ansel Phelps.   Dec. 1824.
_8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Alfred Matthews._

Engraved title, and folding plate of the Old House in Deerfield which
escaped the fire of 1704.


HUGHES, JOHN.--Calypso and Telemachus. An Opera. Perform'd at the
Queen's Theatre in the Hay-Market. Written by Mr. Hughes.   The Musick
compos'd by Mr. Galliard.   London, Printed for E. Sanger . . . 1712 . . .
_4to, half red morocco, gilt top, by Alfred Matthews._

First edition. A-1 in fours.   Dedicated to the Duchess of Hamilton.
Prefixed to this copy (formerly owned by J. Payne Collier) is a Poem of
two pages in the handwriting of Pope, addressed to the author.
Apparently it has never been printed.


HUGHES, JOHN.--Poems on Several Occasions. With Some Select Essays in
Prose . . . By John Hughes, Esq: Adorn'd with Sculptures.   London:
Printed for J. Tonson and J. Watts, MDCCXXXV.   _12mo, two volumes, blue
morocco, gilt back, harps in side corners, gilt edges, by C. Smith, with
his ticket._

The only complete edition.   Portrait by Van der Gucht after Kneller,
and other illustrations.


HUGHES, T. M.--Revelations of Spain in 1845. By an English resident
London: Henry Colburn . . . MDCCCXLV.   _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._


HUGHES, T. M.--Revelations of Portugal, and Narrative of an Overland
Journey to Lisbon, at the close of 1846; with a picture of the present
state of Spain. By T. M. Hughes . . . London: Henry Colburn . . .
MDCCCXLVII.   _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


HUGO, THOMAS, _editor_.--The Bewick Collector. A descriptive catalogue
of the works of Thomas and John Bewick; including cuts, in various
states, for books and pamphlets, private gentlemen, public companies,
exhibitions, races, newspapers, shop cards, invoice heads, bar bills,
coal certificates, broadsides, and other miscellaneous purposes, and
wood blocks. With an Appendix of Portraits, Autographs, Works of
Pupils, &c. &c. The whole described from the Originals contained in the
largest and most perfect collection ever formed, and illustrated with a
hundred and twelve cuts.   By Thomas Hugo, . . . the possessor of the
collection.   London: Lovell Reeve and Co, . . . M DCCC LXVI.   _Royal
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.   Portrait by F. Bacon after James Ramsay.


HUISH, ROBERT.--The Historical Gallery of celebrated men of every age
and nation; exhibiting a splendid series of Authentic Portraits,
faithfully copied and skilfully engraved from rare and acknowledged
originals, by artists of the first celebrity, accompanied by
biographical sketches and observations on their character and writings,
founded on the authority of genuine and unpublished documents, and
illustrated by fac-similes of letters and extracts from their
manuscripts, with the autograph of the individual affixed to each
portrait.   By Robert Huish, . . . London: printed for Thomas Kelly, . . .
1830.   _8vo, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top._

Over fifty portraits on India paper after Reynolds, Vandyke, Holbein,
Lawrence, Raeburn, Vertue, Houbraken, and others.


HULL, THOMAS. See Shenstone, William.


HUME, SIR ABRAHAM.--Notices of the Life and Works of Titian.   London:
sold by John Rodwell, . . . 1829.   _Royal 8vo, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Portrait of Titian after Carracci, and lists not only of his paintings,
but of the engravings from them. Sixty engravings inserted, including
fourteen portraits of Titian, fifteen other portraits, and thirty-one
plates after paintings by Titian, views, etc. Many of the engravings are
proofs in various states.


HUME, DAVID.--The History of England by David Hume   Oxford, published
by Talboys and Wheeler; and William Pickering, London.   MDCCCXXVI.
_Royal 8vo, eight volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt
over rough edges, by Bedford._

One of three copies printed on large and tinted paper, with twenty-eight
portraits of the Sovereigns by Worthington, proofs on India paper.


HUMOURIST, THE.--See Jest-Books.


HUMPHREYS, DAVID.--An Essay on the Life of the Honourable Major General
Israel Putnam. Addressed to the State Society of the Cincinnati in
Connecticut, And first published by their order.   By Col. David
Humphreys. With notes and additions.   With an appendix, containing an
historical and topographical sketch of Bunker Hill Battle.   By S.
Swett. Boston: published by Samuel Avery, . . . 1818.   _12mo, blue
levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Portrait by T. Gimbrede from a drawing by Miss A. Hall after the
original by Trumbull.   The dedication to the Hon. Col. Jeremiah
Wadsworth is dated Mount-Vernon, June 4, 1788.


HUMPHREYS, HENRY NOEL.--The Illuminated Books of the Middle Ages; an
account of the development and progress of the art of illumination, as a
distinct branch of pictorial ornamentation, from the IVth. to the
XVIIth. centuries.   By Henry Noel Humphreys.   Illustrated by a series
of examples, of the size of the originals, selected from the most
beautiful MSS. of the various periods, executed on stone and printed in
colours by Owen Jones.   London:   Longman, Brown, . . . M DCCC XL IX.
_Royal folio, red levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges,
by F. Bedford._

Thirty-nine plates in gold, silver, and colours, and the letter-press
title of 1844.


HUMPHREYS, HENRY NOEL.--A History of the Art of Printing, from its
Invention to its wide-spread development in the middle of the 16^{th}
century. Preceded by a short account of the Origin of the Alphabet, and
the successive methods of recording events and multiplying MS. Books
before the Invention of Printing.   By H. Noel Humphreys . . . With one
hundred illustrations . . . London: Bernard Quaritch, . . . 1867.
_Imperial 4to, original ornamental cloth, uncut edges._

No. 209 of three hundred copies of the first issue printed.


HUMPHREYS, HENRY NOEL.--Masterpieces of the Early Printers & Engravers.
A series of facsimiles from rare and curious books, remarkable for
illustrative devices, beautiful borders, decorative initials, printers'
marks, elaborate title-pages, &c.   By H. Noel Humphreys, . . . London:
Henry Sotheran & Co. . . . 1870.   _Folio, figured green and yellow
silk._

Seventy plates containing eighty-one illustrations.


HUNNEWELL, JAMES FROTHINGHAM.--Triumphs of Early Printing   A Paper read
at the Annual Meeting of The Club of Odd Volumes, at the University
Club, Dec. 26, 1901, by the President James Frothingham Hunnewell
Boston   The Club of Odd Volumes 1902. _4to, half brown morocco, uncut
edges._

No. 36 of sixty-eight copies printed.


HUNT, LEIGH.--The Feast of the Poets, with other pieces in verse, by
Leigh Hunt . . . Second edition, amended and enlarged.   London: Printed
for Gale and Fenner . . . 1815.   _Post 8vo, half red morocco, uncut
edges._


HUNT, LEIGH.--The Descent of Liberty, a mask; by Leigh Hunt.   London:
printed for Gale, Curtis, and Fenner . . . 1815.   _Foolscap 8vo, half
red morocco, uncut edges._

First edition.


HUNT, LEIGH.--Foliage; or poems original and translated, by Leigh Hunt
. . . . London: printed for C. and J. Ollier, . . . 1818.   _Foolscap
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


HUNT AND BYRON.--The Liberal.   Verse and Prose from the South.   By
Leigh Hunt, Lord Byron &c] London, 1822: [-1823] printed by and for John
Hunt. _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

First edition.   The article "Apuleius," Volume 2, page 151, embodies a
covert attack on Dr. Darwin and Anna Seward.

Byron's "Vision of Judgment" was first published in Part I, 1822,
"Heaven and Earth, a Mystery," in Part II, 1822, and "Morgante Maggiore
di Messer Luigi Pulci," Canto I, in Part IV, 1823.


HUNT, LEIGH.--Lord Byron and some of his Contemporaries; with
Recollections of the Author's Life, and of his Visit to Italy.   By
Leigh Hunt.   London: Henry Colburn 1828.   _4to, red levant morocco,
heavy back panels and side corners, gilt edges, by F. Bedford._

First edition.   Portraits and facsimile, also seventy-one inserted
plates, and autograph letters of Leigh Hunt (to Elliston the actor) and
John Murray.   Twenty-seven of the portraits are proofs on India paper,
there are fifteen portraits of Byron, six of Charles Lamb, unlettered
proof mezzotints of Thomas Campbell and George IV, unfinished proof of
David Garrick, of Benjamin West by Caroline Watson, etc.


HUNT, LEIGH.--Lord Byron and some of his Contemporaries; with
Recollections of the Author's Life, and of his visit to Italy.   By
Leigh Hunt.   London: Henry Colburn, . . . 1828.   _8vo, two volumes,
half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Second edition, with five portraits and facsimile.


HUNT, LEIGH.--The Poetical Works of Leigh Hunt. . . . London: Edward
Moxon, . . . M DCCCXXX II. _8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


HUNT, LEIGH.--The Poetical Works of Leigh Hunt. Containing many pieces
now first collected. London: Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXLIV. _12mo, green
calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


HUNT, LEIGH.--Poems of Leigh Hunt With prefaces from some of his
periodicals. Selected and edited by Reginald Brimley Johnson with
Bibliography and etchings by Herbert Railton.   London.   J. M. Dent and
Co . . . 1891.   _Crown 8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred and fifty printed.


HUNT, LEIGH.--The Indicator, and Companion; a miscellany for the fields
and fire-side.   By Leigh Hunt. London: Published for Henry Colburn, by
R. Bentley . . . 1834.   _12mo, two volumes, half green morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Second edition.   Portrait by Meyer after Hayter.


HUNT, LEIGH.--Captain Sword and Captain Pen. A Poem.   By Leigh Hunt.
With some remarks on war and military statesmen. . . . London: Charles
Knight, . . . 1835.   _Post 8vo, cloth._

First edition, with eight full-page woodcuts by J. Jackson after
Thornton Leigh Hunt, son of the author.


HUNT, LEIGH.--The Palfrey; a love-story of old times.   By Leigh Hunt.
London: How and Parsons. 1842.   _8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

First edition, with six woodcut illustrations.


HUNT, LEIGH.--Stories from the Italian Poets: with lives of the writers.
   By Leigh Hunt.   London: Chapman and Hall . . . MDCCCXLVI.   _12mo,
two volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


HUNT, LEIGH.--Men, Women and Books; a selection of Sketches, Essays and
Critical Memoirs, from his uncollected Prose Writings, by Leigh Hunt.
London: Smith, Elder and Co. . . . 1847.   _Crown 8vo, two volumes, tree
calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition, with portrait by Armytage after Severn.


HUNT, LEIGH.--The Town, its memorable characters and events.   By Leigh
Hunt.   St. Paul's to St. James's.   With forty-five illustrations.
London: Smith, Elder and Co., . . . 1848.   _Crown 8vo, two volumes, red
levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt over uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition.


HUNT, LEIGH.--A Jar of Honey from Mount Hybla, by Leigh Hunt.
Illustrated by Richard Doyle. London: Smith, Elder and Co., . . .
MDCCCXLVIII. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, with the
original ornamental covers by Owen Jones bound in, by Riviere._

First edition.


HUNT, LEIGH.--The Autobiography of Leigh Hunt; with Reminiscences of
Friends and Contemporaries . . . London: Smith, Elder and Co., . . .
1850. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Portraits of Hunt, aetat. 17, 36, and 66, lithographs on
India paper.


HUNT, LEIGH.--The Religion of the Heart.   A Manual of Faith and Duty.
London: John Chapman . . . M.DCCC.LIII.   _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


HUNT, LEIGH.--The Old Court Suburb; or, Memorials of Kensington, regal,
critical, and anecdotal.   By Leigh Hunt   London: Hurst and Blackett . . .
1855. _12mo, two volumes, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges._

First edition.


HUNT, LEIGH.--The Correspondence of Leigh Hunt.   Edited by his eldest
son . . . With a portrait. London: Smith, Elder and Co., . . .
M.DCCC.LXII. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


HUNT, LEIGH.--Essays of Leigh Hunt selected and edited by Reginald
Brimley Johnson with introduction. Portrait by S. Lawrence and etchings
by Herbert Railton   London J. M. Dent and Co . . . 1891.   _Crown 8vo,
half vellum, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred and fifty printed.


[HUNT, WILLIAM HOLMAN.]--William Holman Hunt and his Works.   A Memoir
of the Artist's Life, with description of his pictures.   London:
published by James Nisbet & Co. . . . 1860.   _8vo, cloth, gilt edges._


HUNTINGTON, ARCHER MILTON.--A Notebook in Northern Spain   By Archer M.
Huntington Illustrated   New York and London   G. P. Putnam's Sons
1898.   _Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


HUTCHINSON, GREGORY, AND LYDEKKER.--The Living Races of Mankind   A
popular illustrated account of the customs, habits, pursuits, feasts &
ceremonies of the races of mankind throughout the world by H. N.
Hutchinson . . . J. W. Gregory . . . R. Lydekker . . . assisted by
eminent specialists.   [648 illustrations, including coloured
frontispieces] London: Hutchinson & Co., . . . [n. d.]   _Royal 4to, two
volumes, half red morocco, gilt edges._


HUTCHINSON, THOMAS.--The Speeches of His Excellency Governor Hutchinson
to the General Assembly of the Massachusetts-Bay.   At a Session begun
and held on the Sixth of January, 1773.   With the Answers of His
Majesty's Council and the House of Representatives respectively.
[Publish'd by Order of the House] Boston; New-England: Printed by Edes
and Gill . . . M. DCC. LXXIII.   _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._


HUTCHINSON, FRANCIS, BISHOP.--A Defence of the Antient Historians:
with A Particular Application of it to the History of Ireland. . . .
Dublin: Printed by S. Powell, For John Smith and William Bruce, . . .
1734.   _8vo, old brown morocco, gilt back, sides tooled in the
"cottage" design, gilt edges._


HYMN TO NEPTUNE.--A Hymn to Neptune; Occasion'd By the late Glorious
Victory obtain'd in the Height of Malaga by Her Majesty's Royal Navy,
under the Command of Sir George Rooke, Vice-Admiral of England, &c. . . .
   London, Printed for R. Basset . . . 1705. . . . _4to, paper
wrappers, by The Club Bindery._

Dedicated to Sir George Rooke.


HYMNS.--Victorian Hymns. English Sacred Songs of Fifty Years.   London
Kegan Paul, Trench & Co., . . . MDCCCLXXXVII.   _Crown 8vo, original
covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed.


IDLER, THE.--See British Classics and British Essayists.


"INCONNUE."--See Merimee, Prosper.


INDEPENDENT REFLECTOR, THE.--See Livingston, William.


INDIAN LAWS.--The New Laws of the Indies for the Good Treatment and
Preservation of the Indians promulgated by the Emperor Charles the Fifth
1542-1543 A Facsimile Reprint of the Original Spanish Edition Together
with a literal Translation into the English Language To which is
prefixed an Historical Introduction By the late Henry Stevens of Vermont
And Fred W Lucas   London privately printed at the Chiswick Press MD CCC
LXXXX III.   _Folio, maroon levant morocco, gilt back, side panels,
doubled with vellum, vellum guards, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

No. 3 of thirteen copies printed upon vellum.   Woodcuts.


INMAN, THOMAS.--Ancient Faiths embodied in ancient names: or an attempt
to trace the religious belief, sacred rites, and holy emblems of certain
nations by an interpretation of the names given to children by priestly
authority, or assumed by prophets, kings, and hierarchs. By Thomas Inman
. . . second edition.   London: Trubner & Co., . . . 1872.   _8vo, two
volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._

Twelve plates and numerous woodcuts.


IRELAND, ALEXANDER.--The Book-Lover's Enchiridion: thoughts on the
Solace and Companionship of Books, and topics incidental thereto;
garnered from writers of every age for the help and betterment of all
readers. By Alexander Ireland . . . [Third edition] London: Simpkin,
Marshall, & C^{o}. 1883.   _8vo, half morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait, vignette, and facsimile.


IRELAND, ALEXANDER.--The Book-Lover's Enchiridion: a Treasury of
Thoughts on the Solace and Companionship of Books gathered . . . : By
Alexander Ireland . . . London: Simpkin, Marshall, & Co. . . . 1888.
_Square 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Fifth edition revised and further enlarged.


IRELAND, JOHN.--See Hogarth and Ireland.


IRELAND, SAMUEL.--A Picturesque Tour through Holland, Brabant, and part
of France; Made in the Autumn of 1789.   Illustrated with Copper Plates
in Aqua Tinta From Drawings made on the Spot by Samuel Ireland . . .
London: May 1^{st} 1790, Printed for T. & I. Egerton . . . _4to, two
volumes, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Allo._

Large paper copy, with engraved title-pages and forty-three plates.


IRELAND, SAMUEL.--A Picturesque Tour through Holland. 1790. _4to, two
volumes, half blue morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

Another large paper copy, with proofs of the prints and most of the
etchings, many of them before the letters, and some of the original
drawings.   Some additional illustrations, including a brilliant
portrait of Johan van Oldenbarnevelt by Andries Vaillant. Presentation
copy from the author to Mr. Coram.


IRELAND, SAMUEL.--Picturesque Views, on the River Medway, from the Nore
to the vicinity of its source in Sussex: with observations on the public
buildings and other works of art in its neighbourhood.   By Samuel
Ireland, . . . London: published by T. and J. Egerton, . . . M, DCC,
XCIII.   _8vo, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Matthews._

Frontispiece-title by C. Apostool after Mortimer, and twenty-eight other
plates, all in bistre.


IRELAND, WILLIAM HENRY.--Chalcographimania; or the Portrait-collector
and Printseller's Chronicle with infatuations of every description.   A
Humorous Poem, in four books, with copious Notes explanatory.   By
Satiricus Sculptor Esq. . . . [W. H. Ireland]   London: printed for R.
S. Kirby 1814.   _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

T. Coram furnished the facts (?) on which Ireland founded this Satire.


IRELAND.--Real Life in Ireland; or, the Day and Night Scenes, rovings,
rambles, and sprees, bulls, blunders, bodderation and blarney, of Brian
Boru, Esq. and his elegant friend Sir Shawn O'Dogherty.   Exhibiting a
Real Picture of Characters, Manners, &c. in High and Low Life, in Dublin
and various parts of Ireland.   Embellished with [19] humorous coloured
engravings, From Original Designs by the most eminent Artists.   By a
Real Paddy. London: printed by B. Bensley, . . . 1821.   _8vo, half red
levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

Sometimes attributed to Pierce Egan.


IRISH MINSTRELSY, or Bardic Remains of Ireland with English Poetical
Translations.   Collected and edited with notes and illustrations, by
James Hardiman . . . London: Joseph Robins . . . 1831.   _8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


IRVING, WASHINGTON, AND OTHERS.--Salmagundi; or, the Whim-Whams and
Opinions of Launcelot Langstaff Esq. and others . . . New York: Printed
& published by D. Longworth . . . 1807-1808.   _12mo, two volumes in
one, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford, with the
original wrappers of each part._

First edition. Twenty numbers, January, 1807--January, 1808. Written
with J. K. Paulding and William Irving.


IRVING, WASHINGTON, AND OTHERS.--Salmagundi; or, the Whim-Whams and
Opinions of Launcelot Langstaff, Esq. and others [J. K. Paulding,
Washington and William Irving]   First Series . . . a new edition,
corrected by the authors   New York: Harper & Brothers . . . 1835.
_12mo, two volumes, half cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


IRVING, WASHINGTON, AND OTHERS.--Salmagundi. Second series.   By
Launcelot Langstaff, Esq.   New York: published by Harper & Brothers . . .
1835.   _12mo, two volumes, half cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--A History of New York, from the beginning of the
World to the end of the Dutch dynasty. Containing among many Surprising
and Curious Matters, the Unutterable Ponderings of Walter the Doubter,
the Disastrous Projects of William the Testy, and the Chivalric
Achievments of Peter the Headstrong, the three Dutch Governors of New
Amsterdam; being the only Authentic History of the Times that ever hath
been, or ever will be Published. By Diedrich Knickerbocker . . .
Published by Inskeep & Bradford, New York . . . 1809.   _12mo, two
volumes, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bradstreet._

First edition, afterwards rewritten.   Folded view of New York, about
1640, and four original drawings.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--A History of New York. 1809.   _12mo, two volumes
in one, red levant morocco, back and sides richly tooled with roses,
&c., gilt edges, by David._

Another copy.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--A History of New York, from the Beginning of the
World to the End of the Dutch Dynasty. . . . The Third Edition.   By
Diedrich Knickerbocker . . . Philadelphia:   Published by M. Thomas . . .
1819.   _8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back and side
panels, edges entirely uncut, by Riviere._

Large paper copy. Frontispieces by Leslie and Allston inserted, proofs
on India paper.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--A Humorous History of New York, from the Beginning
of the World, to the end of the Dutch Dynasty: containing, among many
surprising and curious matters, the Unutterable Ponderings of Walter the
Doubter, the disastrous projects of William the Testy, and the chivalric
achievements of Peter the Headstrong; the three Dutch Governors of New
Amsterdam; being the only authentic history of the times that ever hath
been published.   A new edition.   By Diedrich Knickerbocker . . .
London: printed for W. Wright . . . 1820.   _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Holloway._

Frontispiece and (inserted) the six plates after designs by Leslie and
Allston, proofs on India paper.

The original text before its revision.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--A History of New-York, from the beginning of the
world to the end of the Dutch dynasty; containing, among many surprising
and curious matters, the unutterable ponderings of Walter the doubter,
the disastrous projects of William the Testy, and the chivalric
achievements of Peter the Headstrong--the three Dutch Governors of New
Amsterdam: being the only authentic history of the times that ever hath
been or ever will be published. By Diedrich Knickerbocker. . . . With
[16] illustrations. By Felix O. C. Darley, engraved by eminent artists.
   New York: G. P. Putnam & Company, . . . 1854.   _8vo, green morocco,
fillets on the back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by W. Matthews._

Bound in is Irving's original manuscript of the rewritten work, with,
the text of the first edition altered and corrected, and all the
additional matter.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--A History of New York . . . The Author's revised
edition. Complete in one volume.   New York: George P. Putnam and Son . . .
[Riverside Press, Cambridge] 1867.   _Imperial 8vo, brown levant
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

One of three copies specially printed on drawing paper. In addition to
the series of illustrations by Darley and others, proofs on India paper,
published with the book, four portraits of Irving have been added,
proofs, and a full set of the illustrations after Leslie and Allston,
proofs on India paper.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--A History of New York from the Beginning of the
World to the End of the Dutch Dynasty, containing among many Surprising
and Curious Matters, the Unutterable Ponderings of Walter the Doubter,
the Disastrous Projects of William the Testy, and the Chivalric
Achievements of Peter the Headstrong--The Three Dutch Governors of New
Amsterdam; being the only Authentic History of the Times that ever hath
been or ever will be Published.   By Diedrich Knickerbocker . . . A New
Edition, containing unpublished corrections of the Author, with
Illustrations by Geo. H. Boughton, Will H. Drake, and Howard Pyle, and
Etchings by Henry C. Eno and F. Raubicheck . . . New York: Printed for
the Grolier Club, MDCCCLXXXVI.   _8vo, two volumes, orange levant
morocco, back and sides covered with diamond panels filled by special
tools, cut from the designs in the book, doubled with vellum, inside
borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by Joly._

One of one hundred and seventy-five copies on Holland paper, printed
from Elzevir types with the Club Seal on the title-page. The etchings
are in three states, different colours, the head and tail pieces printed
in brown.

This edition was printed from Irving's original manuscript, in this
library; every variation in the text is noted, and the author's
punctuation is carefully preserved.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--A History of New York. 1886.   _8vo, two volumes,
brown levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, doubled with red morocco,
gilt borders, red silk guards, gilt over uncut edges, in maroon morocco
cases, by Joly._

One of two copies printed upon vellum, with duplicate impressions of the
etchings.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent.   New
York: printed by C. S. Van Winkle . . . 1819.   _8vo, two volumes, green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by David._

First edition.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent. . . . New
Edition.   London: John Murray . . . 1822.   _8vo, two volumes, calf,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Holloway._

Portrait by Scriven after Newton, and six plates after Leslie's designs
inserted: proofs on India paper.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent^{n} . . .
Author's revised edition. With original designs by F. O. C. Darley,
engraved by Childs, Herrick, etc.   New York: G. P. Putnam & Company . . .
1854.   _Small 4to, green morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Twenty-two illustrations, the vignettes on India paper.

The author's manuscript revisions, forty-two pages in the handwriting of
Irving, are inserted in this copy.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon Gent.   Artist's
Edition.   Illustrated with one hundred and twenty engravings on wood,
from original designs . . . New York: G. P. Putnam:   Hurd & Houghton . . .
MDCCCLXV.   _4to, green morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt
edges, by Matthews._

Steel portrait and one hundred and twenty-three woodcut illustrations.
The original drawings for the cover, title-page, and ten other
illustrations are inserted in this copy, as well as six by Shattuck,
Hill, etc., apparently never engraved.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon Gent.   Artist's
Edition.   Illustrated with one hundred and twenty engravings on wood,
from original designs . . . New York: G. P. Putnam: Hurd and Houghton . . .
M.D.CCC.LX.V.   _4to, red levant morocco, rich gilt back and broad
side borders, gilt edges, by Matthews._

Portrait of Irving on steel, in brown, from the painting by Stuart
Newton, 1820.   Further illustrated by the insertion of forty-five
plates, including an original drawing of the Boar's Head Tavern, the
cancelled title-page, the plates by Leslie, Allston, and Westall, in two
and three states, engraver's etching, proofs before letters and
open-letter proofs, all on India paper, mezzotint portrait of
Shakespeare by Turner after Jansen, many proof portraits on India paper,
etc.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon Gent.   (Washington
Irving.) [vignette] Edition de luxe. . . . Philadelphia: J. B.
Lippincott & Co. 1882.   _Imperial 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait after Stuart Newton.

Two portraits by Hall after Stuart Newton and John de Mare after Jarvis,
and one hundred and fifty vignettes on India paper, engraved on wood by
Richardson after Parsons, Hoppin, Darley, and others.

No. 339 of five hundred copies printed.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Old Christmas: from the Sketch Book of Washington
Irving.   Illustrated by R Caldecott   London.   Macmillan & Co.   1892.
   _Imperial 8vo, buckram, uncut edges._

No. 210 of two hundred and fifty large paper copies printed.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Rip Van Winkle and the Legend of Sleepy Hollow by
Washington Irving   with fifty-three illustrations by George H.
Boughton, A. R. A. London   Macmillan and Co. . . . 1893.   _Royal 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

One of two hundred and fifty large paper copies printed.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Bracebridge Hall, or the Humourists.   A Medley, by
Geoffrey Crayon, Gent. [Quotation of three lines from "Christmas
Ordinary"] New York: printed by C. S. Van Winkle . . . 1822. _8vo, two
volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by
David._

One of two editions published in 1822.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Bracebridge Hall, or The Humourists.   A Medley, by
Geoffrey Crayon, Gent. [Quotation of four lines from "Christmas
Ordinary"] New York: printed by C. S. Van Winkle, No. 101 Greenwich
Street.   1822.   _12mo, two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another edition of 1822, a 12mo in sixes, whereas the preceding is an
8vo in fours.   The quotation from "Christmas Ordinary" on the
title-page occupies four lines in this edition, three in the preceding.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Bracebridge Hall; or, the humorists.   By Geoffrey
Crayon, Gent. . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1822.   _8vo, two
volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

First English edition.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Bracebridge Hall.   By Washington Irving.
Illustrated by R. Caldecott.   London. Macmillan & Co. 1877.   _Crown
8vo, decorated cloth, gilt edges._


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Letters of Jonathan Old-style, Gent.   By the
Author of the Sketch Book with a Biographical Notice   New York:
published by William H. Clayton . . . 1824.   _8vo, blue levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Tales of a Traveller. By Geoffrey Crayon, Gent
London: John Murray . . . 1824.   _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Holloway._

First edition.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--A History of the Life and Voyages of Christopher
Columbus.   By Washington Irving. . . . In three volumes.   New York.
G. and C. Carvill, . . . 1828.   _8vo, three volumes, green levant
morocco, gilt back, side corners, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First American edition.   Map of the route of Columbus on arriving among
the Bahama Islands.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--A History of the Life and Voyages of Christopher
Columbus.   By Washington Irving   London: John Murray   MDCCCXXVIII.
_8vo, four volumes, calf gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Holloway._

First English edition. Two folded maps.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--The Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus and
the voyages and discoveries of the companions of Columbus by Washington
Irving . . . Author's revised edition . . . G. P. Putnam's Sons New York
. . . October 21, 1892.   _Royal 4to, three volumes, vellum boards, gilt
top, uncut edges._

Quadri-Centennial Edition, No. 1589 of four hundred and two copies
numbered from 1492 to 1893, with two frontispieces in colour, five
etchings and twelve steel plates printed on India paper, thirteen
photogravures printed on Japan paper, forty-three plates printed on
Japan paper and mounted, and sixty-seven illustrations in the text.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--A Chronicle of the Conquest of Granada.   By Fray
Antonio Agapida.   Philadelphia: Carey, Lea & Carey . . . 1829.   _12mo,
two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by
David._

First American edition.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--A Chronicle of the Conquest of Granada.   From the
MSS. of Fray Antonio Agapida.   By Washington Irving.   London: John
Murray . . . MDCCCXXIX.   _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Holloway._

First English edition.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--The Alhambra: a Series of Tales and Sketches of the
Moors and Spaniards.   By the author of the Sketch Book   Philadelphia:
Carey & Lea 1832.   _12mo, two volumes in one, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--The Alhambra. 1832. _12mo, two volumes, red
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--The Crayon Miscellany. By the author of the Sketch
Book.   No. 1. containing A Tour on the Prairies.   [No. 2. containing
Abbotsford and Newstead Abbey. No. 3. containing Legends of the Conquest
of Spain.]   Philadelphia: Carey, Lea & Blanchard.   1835.   _12mo,
three volumes, red morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Astoria, or Anecdotes of an Enterprise beyond the
Rocky Mountains. By Washington Irving.   Philadelphia: Carey, Lea &
Blanchard 1836.   _8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by David._

First edition, with folded map.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--The Rocky Mountains: or, scenes, incidents, and
adventures in the Far West; digested from the journal of Captain B. L.
E. Bonneville, of the army of the United States, and illustrated from
various other sources, by Washington Irving. . . . Philadelphia. Carey,
Lea, & Blanchard.   1837.   _12mo, two volumes, red morocco, gilt edges,
by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Two folded maps.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--The Life of Oliver Goldsmith by Washington Irving.
   _4to, two volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back and sides, vellum
guards, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

The original manuscript of the enlarged and completed work, with
corrected pages of the first issue, also a portrait of Irving by Sartain
after G. S. Newton, and one of Goldsmith, India proof, by Wivell after
Sir Joshua Reynolds.   Carefully inlaid on Whatman paper by Trent.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Oliver Goldsmith: a biography.   By Washington
Irving, with illustrations. [woodcuts]   New York: George P. Putnam . . .
1849. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt over uncut
edges, by Matthews._

First complete edition.

Fifty-two selected plates inserted, including portraits of Goldsmith's
contemporaries, many proofs.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Oliver Goldsmith: a Biography.   By Washington
Irving.   With illustrations. New York: George P. Putnam & Co. . . .
MDCCCLIII. _4to, green morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Matthews._

Inserted in this copy are the original manuscript corrections and
revisions in the handwriting of Irving.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Life of George Washington. By Washington Irving. . . .
New York: G. P. Putnam & Co., . . . 1855. [-1859]   _4to, five
volumes, half olive morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.   No. 37 of one hundred and ten copies printed on large
paper, with India proof impressions of all the plates, including the
series published as a supplement.

The title-page of Volume I reads, "In three vols."   Volumes II and III
are dated 1856, Volume IV, 1857, Volume V, 1859.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--The Works of Washington Irving.   New edition,
revised [with the Life and Letters of Irving, by his nephew Pierre M.
Irving, and the Spanish Papers]   New York: Geo. P. Putnam. 1860-[1867].
   _Square 8vo, twenty-eight volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed.

Portraits, steel plates, and woodcuts after the designs of Leslie,
Allston, Darley, and others.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Ninety-three pages in the hand-writing of
Washington Irving, being the original manuscript copy of that portion of
Irving's Life of Washington covering the incidents relative to the
Treason of Benedict Arnold: India proof portraits of Arnold and Andre
added.   _4to, half green morocco._


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Memorandum Book containing fifty leaves in the
handwriting of Washington Irving, being notes for his Life of
Washington.

These notes are largely copies of letters written by Washington and
extracts from his diary.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Journal of a Tour through France, Italy, Sicily.
1804-1805.   _4to, old vellum boards, with ties._

A manuscript of one hundred and fifteen closely written leaves, dated
Bordeaux. July 1, 1804 to January 23, 1805.   The first entry begins "My
dear Brother."   On the back of the first cover and on the first
fly-leaf are pencil drawings, and on the inside of the back cover, "Ship
Matilda, 27 Dec. opposite Corsica," and "Achete en Bordeaux Juillet
1804.   Prix 3 liv."


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Three Memorandum Books of forty leaves each
containing notes in the handwriting of Washington Irving, chiefly
concerning the Arabs, and gathered while the author was engaged on the
Life and Successors of Mahomet

These notes are chiefly from Sale's text of the Koran and the works of
D'Herbelot.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Four Memorandum Books each with eight pages in the
handwriting of Washington Irving, containing notes of information
respecting the Far West and Indians, for use in his book, the "Tour of
the Prairies."

These notes are almost entirely relative to the ethnology, zooelogy,
botany, and geography of the Far West.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Notes of a Tour in Europe. Fifty pages of Memoranda
in the handwriting of Washington Irving, who, in describing this as
Volume 4, indicates that it contains the "Route from Zuerich to Paris and
from Paris to London, from May 17^{th} to Oct. 8^{th} 1805." A further
note states that he purchased this book in Zuerich for 1-1/2 livres.
Irving's autograph is on the inside of the front cover.   _4to, vellum
covers, with flap and cord._


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Irving Vignettes. Vignette Illustrations of the
Writings of Washington Irving, [28] engraved on steel by Smillie, Hall,
and others.   With a sketch of his life and works, from Allibone's
forthcoming "Dictionary of Authors," and passages from the works
illustrated.   New York: G. P. Putnam, . . . 1858. _12mo, cloth, uncut
edges._


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--Washington Irving.   Mr. Bryant's Address on his
Life and Genius.   Addresses by Everett, Bancroft, Longfellow, Felton,
Aspinwall, King, Francis, Greene.   Mr. Allibone's sketch of his Life
and Works.   With eight photographs.   New York: G. P. Putnam 1860.
_Square 8vo, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Matthews._

Ten photographs and a steel portrait of Bryant.


IRVING, WASHINGTON.--The Life and Letters of Washington Irving.   By his
nephew Pierre M. Irving. . . . New York: G. P. Putnam, . . . 1862
[-1864]. _8vo, four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition: with four portraits.


IRVING AND FAIRHOLT.--Shakespeare's Home; visited and described by
Washington Irving and F. W. Fairholt: with a Letter from Stratford by J.
F. Sabin: and the Complete Prose Works of Shakespeare. [vignette] With
[11] Etchings [on India paper] by J. F. and W. W. Sabin.   New York: J.
Sabin and Sons, . . . 1877. _8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


IRVING, WILLIAM.--See Irving, Washington. Salmagundi.


IRWIN, R. B.--See Bowman and Irwin.


ITALIAN NOVELISTS, THE.--See Roscoe, Thomas.


ITALIAN TALES.   Tales of Humour, Gallantry, and Romance, selected and
translated from the Italian. With sixteen illustrative Drawings by
George Cruikshank. London: printed for Charles Baldwyn . . . MDCCCXXIV.
   _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


JABET, GEORGE.--The Poets' Pleasaunce: or, Garden of all sorts of
Pleasant Flowers, which our Pleasant Poets have, in past time, for
pastime, planted.   By Eden Warwick [the Rev. George Jabet] London:
Longman . . . MDCCCXLVII. _4to, green levant morocco, gilt back, corner
ornaments on the sides, gilt edges, by Brany._

Engraved frontispiece and woodcut borders.


JACKSON, CATHERINE CHARLOTTE, LADY.--The Last of the Valois, and
Accession of Henry of Navarre. 1559-1589.   By Catherine Charlotte, Lady
Jackson, . . . [9 portraits]   New York: Scribner and Welford, . . .
[London.]   1888.   _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth._


JACKSON, CATHERINE CHARLOTTE, LADY.--The First of the Bourbons [Henry
IV] 1589-1595.   by Catherine Charlotte Lady Jackson . . . London
Richard Bentley and Son . . . 1890. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

Ten steel portraits.


JACKSON, JOHN.--A Treatise on Wood Engraving, historical and practical,
with upwards of three hundred illustrations engraved on wood.   By John
Jackson   London: Charles Knight and Co, . . . 1839.   _Royal 8vo, half
green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


JACKSON AND CHATTO.--A Treatise on Wood Engraving Historical and
Practical with upwards of three hundred illustrations engraved on wood
by John Jackson. The historical portion by W. A. Chatto.   Second
Edition with a new chapter on the artists of the present day by Henry G.
Bohn and 145 additional wood engravings. London   Henry G. Bohn, . . .
M. DCCC. LXI.   _Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


JACOB, HILDEBRAND.--The Works of Hildebrand Jacob, Esq; containing
Poems on Various Subjects, and Occasions; with the Fatal Constancy, a
tragedy; and Several Pieces in Prose. The greatest Part never before
publish'd.   London, Printed for   W. Lewis . . . M DCC XXXV.   _8vo,
red morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Contains final leaf of Errata.


JACOBI, CHARLES THOMAS.--On the Making and Issuing of Books   by Charles
Thomas Jacobi   London: made at the Chiswick Press . . . M DCCC XCI.
_4to, half vellum, uncut edges._

No. 44 of fifty copies printed on large paper.


JACOBI, CHARLES THOMAS.--Gesta Typographica or a Medley for Printers and
Others collected by Chas. T. Jacobi   London: Elkin Mathews . . . M
DCCC XCVII. _12mo, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 4 of fifty copies printed on Japanese vellum.


JACOBS, JOSEPH, _editor_.--English Fairy Tales collected by Joseph
Jacobs . . . illustrated by John D. Batten [vignette] London   David
Nutt, . . . 1890. _Royal 8vo, boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 76 of eighty copies printed on Japanese vellum, with frontispiece in
two colours, black and bistre.


JACOBS, JOSEPH, _editor_.--Indian Fairy Tales selected and edited by
Joseph Jacobs . . . illustrated by John D. Batten [vignette]   London
David Nutt, . . . 1892. _Royal 8vo, boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 7 of one hundred and sixty copies printed on Japanese vellum, with
full-page illustrations in two colours, black and bistre.


JACOBS, JOSEPH, _editor_.--Celtic Fairy Tales selected and edited by
Joseph Jacobs . . . illustrated by John D. Batten [vignette] London
David Nutt, . . . 1892. _Royal 8vo, boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 119 of one hundred and twenty-five copies printed on Japanese
vellum, with full-page illustrations in two colours, black and bistre.


JACOBS, JOSEPH, _editor_.--More English Fairy Tales collected and edited
by Joseph Jacobs . . . illustrated by John D. Batten [vignette] London
David Nutt, . . . 1894.   _Royal 8vo, boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 159 of one hundred and sixty copies printed on Japanese vellum, with
full-page illustrations in two colours, black and bistre.


JACOBS, JOSEPH, _editor_.--More Celtic Fairy Tales selected and edited
by Joseph Jacobs . . . illustrated by John D. Batten [vignette] London
   David Nutt, . . . 1894.   _Royal 8vo, boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 119 of one hundred and twenty-five copies printed on Japanese
vellum, with full-page illustrations in two colours, black and bistre.


JAMES, FRANK LINSLY.--The Wild Tribes of the Soudan an account of travel
and sport chiefly in the Base country   being personal experiences and
adventures during three winters spent in the Soudan   by F. L. James, . . .
New York   Dodd, Mead, and Company . . . [1883]. _Royal 8vo,
decorated cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Two coloured maps and forty other illustrations.


JAMES AND THRUPP.--The Unknown Horn of Africa.   An exploration from
Berbera to the Leopard River.   By F. L. James, . . . With additions by
J. Godfrey Thrupp, . . . The map by W. D. James and Percy Aylmer.   The
narrative illustrations by Rose Hake, and the drawings of the fauna by
K. Keuleman, from specimens chiefly collected by E. Lort-Phillips.
London: George Philip & Son, . . . 1888.   _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


JAMES, GEORGE PAYNE RAINSFORD, _editor_.--Memoirs of Celebrated Women.
Edited by G. P. R. James . . . London: Richard Bentley . . . 1837.
_12mo, two volumes, half citron levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Two portraits engraved on steel.


JAMES, GEORGE WHARTON.--Indian Basketry. With 300 illustrations.   By
George Wharton James . . . 1901.   Printed Privately for the Author,
George Wharton James, Pasadena, Cal.   _8vo, cloth._


JAMES, HENRY.--The Real Thing and other tales by Henry James   London
Macmillan and Co. . . . 1893.   _Crown 8vo, original cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


JAMES, HENRY.--What Maisie Knew.   By Henry James London: William
Heinemann M DCCCXC VIII. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


JAMES, HENRY.--A Little Tour in France by Henry James with [67]
illustrations by Joseph Pennell Cambridge   Printed at The Riverside
Press   M DCCCC. _8vo, half buckram, uncut edges._


JAMES, MONTAGUE RHODES, _editor_.--A Descriptive Catalogue of Fifty
Manuscripts from the Collection of Henry Yates Thompson   by Montague
Rhodes James, . . . Cambridge: printed at the University Press. 1898.
_Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Presentation copy from Mr. Thompson.


JAMES, WILLIAM DOBEIN.--A Sketch of the Life of Brig. Gen. Francis
Marion, and A History of his Brigade, from its rise in June, 1780, until
disbanded in December, 1782; with Descriptions of Characters and Scenes,
not heretofore published.   Containing also, an Appendix, with copies of
letters which passed between several of the leading characters of that
day; principally From Gen. Greene to Gen. Marion.   By William Dobein
James, . . . Charleston, S. C.   printed by Gould and Riley, . . . 1821.
   _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Portraits of General Greene and General Marion, the latter by T. B.
Welch after Stothard.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--Memoirs of Celebrated Female Sovereigns; by Mrs.
Jameson . . . London: Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley . . . 1831.
_12mo, two volumes, half brown levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Krafft._

First edition.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--The Beauties of the Court of King Charles the
Second; a series of portraits, illustrating the Diaries of Pepys,
Evelyn, Clarendon, and other contemporary writers.   With Memoirs
Biographical and Critical, by Mrs. Jameson, . . . The portraits from
copies made for Her late Royal Highness the Princess Charlotte, by Mr.
Murphy.   Dedicated by permission to His Grace the Duke of Devonshire.
London: published for Henry Colburn by Richard Bentley, . . . 1833.
_Folio, blue levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges,
by The Club Bindery._

Largest paper copy of the first edition, extra-illustrated by the
insertion of twenty-four portraits of contemporary beauties in addition
to the twenty-one published with the book.   The portraits are all
proofs, frequently in three and four states.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--Memoirs of the Beauties of the Court of Charles
the Second, with their portraits, after Sir Peter Lely and other eminent
painters: illustrating the Diaries of Pepys, Evelyn, Clarendon, and
other contemporary writers.   By Mrs. Jameson.   Second edition,
enlarged.   London: Henry Colburn . . . MDCCCXXXVIII.   _Imperial 8vo,
two volumes in one, green morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by
J. Wright._

Twenty-one portraits engraved by Holl, Wright, Thompson, Scriven,
Freeman, Wagstaff, etc.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--Visits and Sketches at home and abroad with tales
and miscellanies now first collected and a new edition of the Diary of
an Ennuyee. By Mrs. Jameson . . . London.   Saunders and Otley . . .
1834.   _12mo, four volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Krafft._

First edition of "Visits and Sketches," second of "Diary of an Ennuyee."
Steel frontispiece and woodcut illustrations.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--The Romance of Biography; or Memoirs of Women
loved and celebrated by Poets, from the days of the Troubadours to the
present age; a series of anecdotes intended to illustrate the influence
which female beauty and virtue have exercised over the characters and
writings of men of genius.   By Mrs. Jameson . . . third edition.
London: Saunders and Otley MDCCCXXXVII.   _Crown 8vo, two volumes, half
brown levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Krafft._

Steel frontispiece.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--A Handbook to the Public Galleries of Art in and
near London.   With Catalogues of the Pictures, accompanied by critical,
historical, and biographical notices, and copious indexes to facilitate
reference.   By Mrs. Jameson . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1842.
_12mo, two volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--Handbook to the Public Galleries of Art in and
near London. . . . By Mrs. Jameson, . . . a new [second] edition, with
an index.   London: John Murray, . . . 1845.   _12mo, half red morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--Memoirs and Essays illustrative of Art,
Literature, and Social Morals.   By Mrs. Jameson . . . London: Richard
Bentley . . . 1846. _12mo, half red levant morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Krafft._

First edition.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--Sacred and Legendary Art   By Mrs. Jameson . . .
containing Legends of the Angels and Archangels, the Evangelists, the
Apostles, the Doctors of the Church and Mary Magdalene (the Patron
Saints and Virgin Patronesses, the Greek and Latin Martyrs, the Early
Bishops, the Hermits, and the Warrior Saints of Christendom)   London:
printed for Longman, . . . 1848.   _Square 8vo, two volumes, brown
levant morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Matthews._

First edition.   Illustrated with twenty-one etchings, and one hundred
and seventy-one woodcuts.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--Sacred and Legendary Art.   By Mrs. Jameson.
Second Edition complete in one volume . . . London: printed for Longman,
. . . 1850.   _Square 8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back and side
panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Sixteen etchings and one hundred and eighty woodcut illustrations.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--Legends of the Monastic Orders, as represented in
the Fine Arts.   Forming the second series of Sacred and Legendary Art.
   By Mrs. Jameson.   London: printed for Longman . . . 1850.   _Square
8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Matthews._

First edition: illustrated by eleven etchings and eighty-four woodcuts.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--Legends of the Madonna, as represented in the
Fine Arts.   Forming the third series of Sacred and Legendary Art.   By
Mrs. Jameson. Illustrated by [29] Drawings and [152] woodcuts. London:
Longman, . . . 1852.   _Square 8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back and
side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

First edition.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--A Commonplace Book of Thoughts, Memories, and
Fancies, original and selected.   Part I. Ethics and Character.   Part
II. Literature and Art.   By Mrs. Jameson . . . With Illustrations and
Etchings.   London: Longman . . . 1854. _8vo, half red levant morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Krafft._

First edition.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--The Communion of Labour: A Second Lecture on the
Social Employments of Women.   By Mrs. Jameson . . . London: Longman . . .
1856.   _Post 8vo, half blue levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Krafft._

First edition.   Presentation copy with the autograph inscription, "The
Lady Augusta Bruce with many kind regards from Anna Jameson. Sep^{t} 4.
1856."


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--Characteristics of Women.   Moral, Poetical, and
Historical.   With Illustrations from the Author's Designs.   By Mrs.
Jameson . . . London: Saunders and Otley . . . 1858.   _8vo, two
volumes, half brown levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Krafft._


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--The History of Our Lord as exemplified in works
of Art: with that of his types; St. John the Baptist, and other persons
of the Old and New Testament.   Commenced by the late Mrs. Jameson,
continued and completed by Lady Eastlake. London: Longman . . . 1864.
_Square 8vo, two volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back and side
panels, gilt edges, by Matthews._

First edition, with thirty-one etchings and two hundred and eighty-one
woodcut illustrations. Also an autograph letter of Mrs. Jameson to
Bentley the publisher inserted.


JAMESON, ANNA MURPHY.--Memoirs of Early Italian Painters, and of The
Progress of Painting in Italy. Cimabue to Bassano.   By Mrs. Jameson . . .
a new edition with [58] portraits.   London: John Murray, . . . 1868.
   _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


JAMI.--The Beharistan (Abode of Spring) by Jami a literal translation
from the Persian. Printed by the Kama Shastra Society for Private
Subscribers only. Benares 1887.   _Crown 8vo, half red morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges._


JARVES, JAMES JACKSON.--Art Studies: the "Old Masters" of Italy;
Painting. By James Jackson Jarves, . . . copperplate illustrations. . . .
New York: Derby and Jackson: . . . 1861.   _8vo, two volumes, half
green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Fifteen illustrations.


JEAFFRESON AND POLE.--The Life of Robert Stephenson, F. R. S. . . . late
President of the Institution of Civil Engineers.   By J. C. Jeaffreson
. . . With descriptive chapters on some of his most important professional
works by William Pole, . . . Second edition. London: Longmans, Green,
Reader, and Dyer.   1866. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Two portraits by Henry Adlard, one after George Richmond, four other
plates, a diagram, and numerous cuts in the text.


JEFFREY, FRANCIS.--Contributions to the Edinburgh Review.   By Francis
Jeffrey, . . . Second Edition. . . . London: printed for Longman, Brown,
Green, and Longmans, . . . 1846.   _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._


JENNINGS, HARGRAVE.--Phallicism Celestial and Terrestrial Heathen and
Christian its connexion with the Rosicrucians and the Gnostics and its
foundation in Buddhism with an essay on mystic anatomy by Hargrave
Jennings . . . London George Redway . . . M DCCC LXXXIV.   _8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


JEPHSON, ROBERT.--The Count of Narbonne, a tragedy.   As it is acted at
the Theatre Royal In Covent Garden.   By Robert Jephson, Esq; London:
Printed for T. Cadell, . . . M DCC LXXXI. _8vo, morocco, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.   Founded on "The Castle of Otranto," by Horace Walpole,
to whom the play is dedicated.


JERDAN, WILLIAM.--The Autobiography of William Jerdan, . . . with his
Literary, Political, and Social Reminiscences and Correspondence during
the last fifty years. . . . London: Arthur Hall, Virtue, & Co., . . .
1852.   _Post 8vo, four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Engraved title-pages and four portraits.


JERNINGHAM, EDWARD.--The Nun: an elegy. By the Author of the Magdalens.
   London: Printed for R. and J. Dodsley, . . . MDCCLXIV. . . . _4to,
paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


JERNINGHAM, EDWARD.--The Deserter: a poem. London: Printed for J. Robson
. . . M DCC LXX. . . . _4to, paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


JERROLD, BLANCHARD.--The Life of George Cruikshank   In Two Epochs by
Blanchard Jerrold . . . with numerous illustrations [vignette] . . .
London Chatto and Windus, . . . 1882 . . . _Crown 8vo, two volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.   Eighty-four illustrations, including two portraits.


JERROLD, DOUGLAS.--Cakes and Ale.   By Douglas Jerrold. . . . London:
How and Parsons, . . . 1842. _Post 8vo, two volumes, original cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition. Engraved frontispieces and title-pages by George
Cruikshank.


JERROLD, DOUGLAS.--The Brownrigg Papers. By Douglas Jerrold.   Edited by
Blanchard Jerrold, . . . With a Coloured Illustration by George
Cruikshank. London: John Camden Hotten . . . 1860.   _Crown 8vo, half
blue levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Champs._


JESSE, EDWARD.--An Angler's Rambles: by Edward Jesse . . . London: John
Van Voorst MDCCCXXXVI.   _Crown 8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

First edition.   Seal vignettes, etc.


JESSE, EDWARD.--Anecdotes of Dogs; by Edward Jesse . . . with
illustrations.   London: Richard Bentley . . . MDCCCXLVI.   _4to, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.   Twenty steel plates by W. R. Smith, etc., and numerous
woodcuts.


JESSE, EDWARD.--Favorite Haunts and Rural Studies; including visits to
spots of interest in the vicinity of Windsor and Eton.   By Edward Jesse
. . . with numerous illustrations. London: John Murray . . . 1847.
_Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


JESSE, JOHN HENEAGE.--Memoirs of the Court of England during the Reign
of the Stuarts, including the Protectorate.   By John Heneage Jesse. . . .
London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1840. [1845.]   _8vo, four volumes,
blue levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt over uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

First edition: with four engravings.


JESSE, JOHN HENEAGE.--Memoirs of the Court of England from the
Revolution in 1688 to the Death of George the Second, [the House of
Hanover.] By John Heneage Jesse. . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . .
1843. _8vo, three volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt over
uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition: with three plates by John Cook after T. Wageman.


JESSE, JOHN HENEAGE.--Memoirs of the Court of England from the
Revolution.   1843.   _8vo, three volumes, half blue levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Another copy, extra-illustrated by the insertion of one hundred and ten
portraits and views, including many proofs on India paper and before
letters, and the rare portrait of Beau Fielding by Van der Gucht.


JESSE, JOHN HENEAGE.--George Selwyn and his Contemporaries; with Memoirs
and Notes.   By John Heneage Jesse . . . London: Richard Bentley &c.
1843. [-'44]   _8vo, four volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt fillets,
gilt over uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition: with nine portraits on steel.


JESSE, JOHN HENEAGE.--Memoirs of the Pretenders and their Adherents. By
John Heneage Jesse, . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1845. _8vo, two
volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt over uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

First edition: with four engravings and a facsimile.


JESSE, JOHN HENEAGE.--Literary and historical Memorials of London.   By
J. Heneage Jesse. . . . In two volumes. . . . London: Richard Bentley,
. . . 1847. _8vo, two volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt
over uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.   Nine plates by J. Cook, and plan of London and
Westminster in the time of Queen Elizabeth.


JESSE, JOHN HENEAGE.--London and its Celebrities. A second series of
literary and historical memorials of London.   By J. Heneage Jesse. . . .
In two volumes. . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1850.   _8vo, two
volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt over uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.


JESSE, JOHN HENEAGE.--Memoirs of King Richard the Third and some of his
contemporaries   With an Historical Drama on the Battle of Bosworth   by
John Heneage Jesse . . . London   Richard Bentley, . . . 1862. _8vo,
blue levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt over uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.   Portrait of Richard by B. Holl after T. Wageman, and
coloured plate.


JESSE, JOHN HENEAGE.--Memoirs of the Life and Reign of King George the
Third.   By J. Heneage Jesse, . . . Second edition.   London: Tinsley
Brothers, . . . 1867. . . . _8vo, three volumes, blue levant morocco,
gilt fillets, gilt over uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

JESSE, JOHN HENEAGE.--Memoirs of Celebrated Etonians: including

  Henry Fielding.
  The Earl of Chatham.
  Horne Tooke.
  Horace Walpole.
  George Grenville.
  Thomas Gray.
  George Selwyn.
  Lord North.
  Earl of Bute.
  Earl Temple.
  etc. etc. etc.

By J. Heneage Jesse, . . . In two volumes. . . . London: Richard Bentley
and Son, . . . 1875.   _8vo, two volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt
fillets, gilt over uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.


JESSE, W.--The Life of Beau Brummell, Esq., commonly called Beau
Brummell.   By Captain [W.] Jesse   London: Saunders and Otley . . .
MDCCCXLIV.   _8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over
uncut edges, by David._

First edition.   In addition to the full-length portrait of the "Beau"
and the frontispiece to Volume II, a brilliant impression of Cook's
engraving of Brummell and a proof portrait of Byron have been inserted.


JEST BOOKS.--Joe Miller's Jests.   or, the Wits Vade-Mecum.   Being A
Collection of the most Brilliant Jests; the Politest Repartees; the most
Elegant Bon Mots, and most pleasant short Stories in the English
Language.   First carefully collected in the Company, and many of them
transcribed from the Mouth of the Facetious Gentleman, whose Name they
bear; and now set forth and published by his lamentable Friend and
former Companion, Elijah Jenkins, Esq; Most Humbly Inscribed To those
Choice-Spirits of the Age, Captain Bodens, Mr. Alexander Pope, Mr.
Professor Lacy, Mr. Orator Henley, and Job Baker, the Kettle-Drummer.
London: Printed and Sold by T. Read, . . . MDCCXXXIX.   _8vo, green
morocco, filleted back and sides, gilt over red edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


JEST BOOKS.--Joe Miller's Jests: or, the Wits Vade-Mecum.   Being A
Collection of the most Brilliant Jests; . . . First carefully
collected in the Company, and many of them transcribed from the Mouth
of the Facetious Gentleman, whose Name they bear; and now set forth
and published by his lamentable Friend and former Companion, Elijah
Jenkins, Esq; Most Humbly Inscribed To those Choice-Spirits of the
Age, Captain Bodens, Mr. Alexander Pope, Mr. Professor Lacy, Mr.
Orator Henley, and Job Baker, the Kettle-Drummer. The Second Edition.
London: Printed and Sold by T. Read, . . . M DCC XXXIX. . . . _8vo, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Riviere._


JEST BOOKS.--Joe Miller's Jests, Or Wit's Merry Companion, containing A
selection of brilliant jests, smart repartees, and short stories,
calculated to promote mirth and good humour, and furnishing
Entertainment for the Winter Evenings.   The whole teaching the
agreeable art of story telling.   The seventh edition.   London: printed
by Sabine and Son, . . . Price Six-Pence. [1745]   _12mo, olive
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece with the legend:

/p
    "Wit a thousand different Shapes it bears,
    And Comedy in a thousand forms Appears."
p/


JEST BOOKS.--Joe Miller's Jests: or, the Wits Vade-mecum, being A
Collection of the most Brilliant Jests, the most excellent Bon Mots,
and most pleasant short Stories in the English Language; . . .
Most humbly Inscribed To those Choice Spirits of the Age, His
Majesty's Poet-Laureat, Mr. David Garrick, Mr. The. Cibber, Mr.
Justice Boden's Horse, Tom Jones, the most Impudent Man living,
the Rev. Mr. Henley, and Job Baker the Kettle-Drummer.   The fourteenth
edition. London: Printed for S. Crowder, . . . W. Nicol, . . . and J.
Williams, . . . (Price One Shilling and Sixpence.) [1771]   _12mo, green
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece.


JEST BOOKS.--Joe Miller's Jests; or the Wits Vade-mecum: Being a
Collection of the most brilliant Jests, curious Bon-Mots, and the
most pleasing short Stories in the English Language, . . . To
which is added A Choice Collection of Moral Sentences; also a selection
of curious epigrams.   Humbly inscribed to the choice spirits of the
age.   A new edition.   London: printed for W. Lane, . . . [Price one
shilling and six-pence.] [n. d.]   _12mo, red straight-grain morocco,
Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece of five men seated at a dining-table.


JEST BOOKS.--Old Joe Miller: being a complete and correct copy from the
Best Edition of his Celebrated Jests; and also including all the good
things in above fifty jest-books published from the year 1558 to the
present time.   By the Editor of New Joe Miller, or The Tickler. . . .
London, Printed by Wilson & Co. . . . For J. Ridgway, . . . 1800. _12mo,
blue straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Frontispiece, "Momus," with the legend, "Ride si sapis."


JEST BOOKS.--New Joe Miller; or, the Tickler. Containing upwards of Five
Hundred Good Things, many of which are original, and the others selected
from the best authors.   The second edition, with additions. [10 lines
from L'Allegro]   London: printed for James Ridgway, York Street, St.
James's Square.   1800.   _12mo, blue straight-grain morocco,
Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece after the manner of Stothard, and half-title.


JEST BOOKS.--The Royal Jester, or Cream of the Jest.   being a
collection of the best

  Jests,
  Puns,
  Jokes,
  Conundrums,
  Repartees, &c,
  &c, &c.

Collected for the Universal Amusement, Diversion and Improvement
of Mankind.   By Martin Merry, Esq.; Wit Professor in Ordinary to
the King of-- . . . London: Printed for F. Stamper, . . . M. DCC. LI.
_Small 8vo, red straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition.   Engraved frontispiece-title and printed title in red
and black.


JEST BOOKS.--Modius Salium.   A collection of such pieces of humour (Not
to be found in others of this Kind) As prevail'd at Oxford in the Time
of Mr. Anthony a Wood.   Collected by himself, and publish'd from his
Original Manuscript.   Oxford: Printed for R. Clements; and sold by
R. Baldwin . . . 1751.   _12mo, red straight-grain morocco, Janseniste,
gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


JEST BOOKS.--The Merry Andrew: being The smartest Collection ever
yet published, of Elegant Repartees, Brilliant Jests, . . . And Second
Hand Conundrums. This Book is the Quintessence of Wit, the Source of
Fun, the Original of Laughter, and the Perfection of true Humour.   By
Ferdinando Funny, Esq; M. M.   And Professor of Drollery in the
University of Humbug. . . . London: Printed for I. Pottinger, . . . M
DCC LIX. _12mo, red straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition.


JEST BOOKS.--The Nut-cracker: containing   An agreeable and great
Variety Of Well-seasoned Jests, Epigrams, Epitaphs, &c. . . . A
New Edition, with many very delightful Additions and charming
Improvements. Publish'd with the Approbation of The Learned in all
Faculties, By Ferdinando Foot, Esq; London: Printed for T. Carnan, . . .
M. DCC. LX.   _12mo, green straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece.   The first edition was printed in 1751.


JEST BOOKS.--The celebrated Mrs. Pilkington's Jests: Or the Cabinet of
Wit and Humour.   To which is now first added, A Great Variety of Bons
Mots, Witticisms, and Anecdotes Of the inimitable Dr. Swift, Dean of St.
Patrick's, Dublin . . . The Second Edition. . . . London, Printed for W.
Nicoll, . . . M DCC LXIV. 12mo, blue straight-grain morocco, Janseniste,
gilt edges, by The Club Bindery.

Frontispiece of Swift.


JEST BOOKS.--Wilkes's Jests, or the Patriot Wit. being a collection of
bonmots, puns, repartees, and other witticisms, respecting John Wilkes,
Esq. and the Ever-Memorable Number Forty-five.. . To which is added
the Freeborn Muse; or Select Pieces of Poetry, by Mr. Wilkes, and other
Gentlemen distinguished for their Wit and Patriotism. . . .
London: Printed for T. Evans, . . . [Price One Shilling.] MDCCLXX.
_12mo, green straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Second edition: with portrait.


JEST BOOKS.--Sir John Fielding's Jests; or, New Fun for the Parlour
and Kitchen: being The Smartest, Wittiest, and Drollest Collection
of Original Jests, Jokes, Repartees, &c. ever yet published. . . .

Among which are particularly noticed all those Jokes that have
passed upon various Examinations at the Public Office, before the late
Sir John Fielding and other Magistrates, and which have occasioned
even Justice itself to relax and give Countenance to a Smile. Compiled
by a Justice of the Peace.   London: Printed for the Editor; and sold
by Alex. Hogg, . . . T. Lewis. . . . [1771]   _12mo, red straight-grain
morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece of "the Worshipful Author and his Companions."


JEST BOOKS.--The Court Jester; or, Museum of Entertainment; to which is
added, a collection of the most fashionable songs, toasts, sentiments,
&c. &c. &c. London: printed for A. Hamilton, . . . Price 1s. 6d. [1771]
   _12mo, red straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Frontispiece printed in blue ink.


JEST BOOKS.--A new Cure for the Spleen: being A Collection of
Advertisements, Humorous, Numerous, Curious, Farcical, Satirical,
Entertaining, and Diverting. Intended for the Amusement of the
fireside. Many of which were never before printed. . . . By A. G.
Love-fun, . . . London: Printed for the Author; and sold by J. Wenman
&c . . . 1778. [Price One Shilling.] _12mo, red straight-grain morocco,
Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._


JEST BOOKS.--The Female Jester; or, Wit for the Ladies.   containing
every Comical Jest, Smart Repartee, &c . . . that can be found In any
Jest-Book, ancient or modern, worthy of being read by the Woman of
Delicacy, or the Man of Sense.   Together with Some few Witticisms
never before Published, . . . Compiled by a Lady. . . . London:
Printed for and Sold by J. Bew, . . . [1778]   _12mo, blue
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece.


JEST BOOKS.--The Jovial Companion; or, Merry Jester.   being a choice
collection of the most witty and entertaining

  Jests,
  Puns,
  Bon Mots,
  Repartees,
  Quibbles,
  Bulls, &c.

London: Sold by T. Bowen, . . . M DCC LXXIX. _12mo, blue straight-grain
morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._


JEST BOOKS.--Yorick's Jests: or, Wit's Commonplace Book, arranged on a
new plan.   being a choice collection of Humourous Jests, Happy
Bons-Mots, &c. &c. . . . selected from the works and anecdotes of
Voltaire, Foote, Ld. Chesterfield, Sterne, &c   And other Celebrated
Wits of the Last and Present Age.   To which is added, a choice
selection of toasts and sentiments. . . . London: Printed for S. Bladon,
. . . 1783.   _12mo, red straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges,
by The Club Bindery._


JEST BOOKS.--Yorick's Jests: or, Wit's Commonplace book, . . . being a
choice collection of Humourous Jests, . . . selected from the works and
anecdotes of Voltaire, Foote, &c . . . And other Celebrated Wits of the
last and present Age.   To whibh is added, a choice selection of
toasts and sentiments. . . . A new edition. London.   Printed for S.
Bladon, . . . [n. d.] _12mo, blue straight-grain morocco, Janseniste,
gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece by J. Lodge.


JEST BOOKS.--Yorick turned Trimmer; or, The Gentleman's Jester: And
newest Collection of Songs. . . . The three Prints, printed in a
beautiful picturesque Manner, in Black, Blossom, and Green, are
worth the Purchase Money of the whole.   London: Printed for the
Proprietor; and sold by W. Nicoll, . . . [1783]   _12mo, blue
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "Yorick riding through the Village," and two other plates,
"Dr. Slop and Obadiah" and "Uncle Toby and Corporal Trim."


JEST BOOKS.--The Theatre of Fun, or, Roderick Random in high glee.
Containing great Variety of Diverting Jests, Entertaining Stories, &c.
&c. . . . London: Printed for William Cavell, . . . M DCC LXXXIV. _12mo,
olive straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Frontispiece, "Lieutenant Bowling & Roderick Random, going to see his
Grandfather."


JEST BOOKS.--The Whimsical Jester, or, Rochester in high glee.
Containing great Variety of Diverting Jests, Entertaining Stories, &c.
&c.   London: Printed for William Cavell, . . . M DCC LXXXVIII.   _12mo,
brown straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Frontispiece.


JEST BOOKS.--The Funny Jester, or the cream of harmony and humour, a
grand collection of all that is Witty, Merry &c. . . . And that will
raise Laughter at an easy Expence.   Compiled by Sir Toby
Tickleside, Alderman and Citizen of Comus's Court.   London: Printed
for W. Lane, . . . M DCC LXXXVIII.   _12mo, red straight-grain morocco,
Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._


JEST BOOKS.--The Christmas Companion; or Mince-pye for all true hearted
and honest Britons. . . . A true roast beef selection, Cut and come
again to your old friend Bill Cheerfull, Who has dressed this high
seasoned Dish to suit every Palate. London: printed for W. Lane,
. . . [1790] _12mo, olive straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece by Sansom after Cruikshank.


JEST BOOKS.--The Royal Court Jester; or, a choice and fasionable
collection of witty sayings, anecdotes, &c. . . . both ancient and
modern; with the Old Buck's Adventures in St. James's Park, with a Young
Maiden of Seventeen. By a member of Comus's Court. . . . London: printed
for J. Sudbury, . . . Price sixpence. [1790] _12mo, olive straight-grain
morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "The Whimsical Meeting."


JEST BOOKS.--Edwin's Jests, humours, frolics, and bonmots; containing
all the good things he has said or done in his whole life; . . . London:
printed by and for J. Roach, . . . (Price Sixpence) [1791]   _12mo,
green straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Frontispiece, "Mr. Edwin as Skirmish in the Musical drama of the
Deserter," by Barlow after Cruikshanks.


JEST BOOKS.--The Royal Jester, or Prince's Cabinet of Wit; Containing
All the Bon mots Witticisms Repartees Bulls Humbugs that have been
uttered by the greatest Wits of the present Century; London. Printed by
and for J. Roach, . . . 1792.   Price One Shilling.   _12mo, red
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Engraved title with vignette and frontispiece by Barlow after (the
elder) Cruikshank, "Two Literary Gentlemen comparing the Merits of Mrs.
Goodall and Mrs. Jordan in Breeches."


JEST BOOKS.--St. James's Repartee; or the witticisms of fashion, taste,
and the bon ton: . . . Compiled to procure a Hearty Laugh.   London:
printed for W. Lane, . . . M DCCXCIII.   _12mo, olive straight-grain
morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "St James's Jesters."


JEST BOOKS.--A New Edition, Greatly Improved. The Covent Garden Jester;
or, Lady's and Gentleman's Treasure of Wit, Humour, and Amusement; . . .
By the Earl of Funsborough. London: printed by and for J. Roach, . . .
(Price Sixpence.) [1793] _12mo, blue straight-grain morocco, Janseniste,
gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "Miss Florida, Capt^{n}. Merry-field & Preserve 'em All, in
the meads near Myrtle-berry Abby," 1795, which does not belong with the
book, as it says, "See page 156." There are but sixty pages in the book.


JEST BOOKS.--The Jolly Jester; or The Wit's Complete Library.
containing A Rich Fund of Entertainment of the most Laughable and
Pleasant Kind: . . . By Marmaduke Momus, Esq. H. I. B. Q. President of
the Imperial Society of Grinners. London: Printed for W. and J.
Stratford, . . . 1794. _12mo, green straight-grain morocco, Janseniste,
gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Engraved frontispiece of Marmaduke Momus. Volume I only.


JEST BOOKS.--New Jolly Jester, or Wit's Pocket Companion; consisting of
a diverting selection of Smart Repartees New Jests &c. &c. . . .
together with a variety of originals, never before published.
Compiled for the Use of the Society of Choice Spirits.   London. Printed
for H. D. Symonds, . . . Price One Shilling.   Printed by T. Plummer, . . .
[n. d.] _12mo, brown straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges,
by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece by T. Tegg after E. Dayes.


JEST BOOKS.--The new London City Jester; or a banquet of wit, mirth, and
fancy. Calculated for the Entertainment and Amusement of both Sexes; . . .
London: printed by and for J. Roach, . . . 1794. _12mo, blue
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "The City Jester, or a View of the Horns."


JEST BOOKS.--The new London Jester; or a complete fund of Mirth, and
Good-Humour. . . . together with the Complete English Songster; Being a
Choice Collection of the most esteemed Songs sung at Vauxhall,
Ranelagh, the London Theatres, and other Assemblies, throughout the
Kingdom. London: printed for the proprietors; . . . 1795. [Price One
Shilling and Sixpence.]   _12mo, blue straight-grain morocco,
Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "Hence loath'd Melancholy."


JEST BOOKS.--The Polite Jester: or, Theatre for Wit. containing
Diverting Jests, Smart Repartees, &c. &c. Interspersed with a
great Variety of comic poetry. The whole intended for chearful
amusement, and is free from indelicacy. London: Printed by and for J.
Drew, . . . 1796. [Price One Shilling.]   _12mo, green straight-grain
morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece.


JEST BOOKS.--Scogin's Jests; Full of Witty Mirth, and pleasant Shifts;
done by him in France and other places. Being A Preservative again
Melancholy, Gathered by Andrew Board, Doctor of Physick. . . . London:
Printed for W. Thackeray, . . . and J. Deacon. . . . Reprinted for J.
Caulfield. 1796. _12mo, red straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Full-length portrait of Andrew Board [Borde] by Clamp after Holbein.


JEST BOOKS.--Quick's Whim, or, the Merry Medley: containing a collection
of . . . jests, bon-mots, repartees, &c. occasionally introduced by this
son of Momus and his companions, at the tables of hospitality, in the
hours of convitiality and moments of mirth. Enriched with an Engraving
of that excellent Comedian. . . . London. Printed for W. Lane, . . .
[1796] _12mo, red straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The
Club Bindery._

Frontispiece of Quick by Eastgate after Corbould.


JEST BOOKS.--The new universal Story-teller, or, A Picture of Human
Life. . . . Southwark: Printed by W. Kemmish, . . . M DCC XCVII.   Price
six-pence. _12mo, green straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges,
by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "Music has Power to melt the Soul," printed in green.


JEST BOOKS.--Paragon Jester; or, the Polite Wit's Museum. Containing a
Variety of elegant Apophthegms, Jests, &c. newly translated from the
French, German, Spanish, Roman, and Eastern Languages: . . . Southwark:
Printed by and for W. Kemmish, . . . 1798. . . . _12mo, olive
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece.


JEST BOOKS.--The Sailor's Jester; or, Merry Lad's Companion: a
diverting, droll and entertaining collection of Funny Jests, Witty
Replies, &c. &c. of the brave tars of old England, from the captain to
the cabin boy: . . . London: printed for W. Lane, . . . [1798] _12mo,
brown levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "The Merry Sailor's."


JEST BOOKS.--The Dramatic Budget; or, Olio of Fancy. Being a choice
collection of much-admired comic scenes: to which are added, prologues
epilogues and tales. . . . London: printed by J. Plymsell, . . . and
published by T. Hooper and J. Woodhouse, . . . 1800. Price sixpence.
_12mo, blue straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Frontispiece, "Fustian & Silvester Daggerwood."


JEST BOOKS.--Admiral Nelson's Fun-Box open'd; being a complete
collection of Jests, of the first cast, by the most celebrated wits of
the age. . . . London. Printed by T. Plummer, . . . [1800]   _12mo,
olive straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Frontispiece, "An Old Story," by Brune after E. Dayes.


JEST BOOKS.--The Ladies Elegant Jester, or Fun for the Female Sex; being
a chaste and delicate selection of good things, written By Mrs.
Montague, the Countess of Aisborough, Lady Douglass, the Countess of
Wimbledon, and other Literary Ladies; . . . together with many
originals, by Ann Sophia Radcliffe. . . . London. Printed for the
Proprietor, and published by Crosby & Letterman . . . Price only 6d.
Plummer, Printer, . . . [1800] _12mo, olive straight-grain morocco,
Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece by Grignion after E. Dayes.


JEST BOOKS.--The New Loyal and Patriotic Jester, or Complete Library of
Fun; intended for the perusal of every loyal Briton; . . . Nearly the
whole of which has never before appeared in print. By Christopher Grin,
Esq. The second edition. London. Printed by T. Plummer, . . . And sold
by H. D. Symonds, . . . Price One Shilling.   [1800]   _12mo, olive
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece by T. Tegg after E. Dayes.


JEST BOOKS.--The Social Magazine or Cabinet of Wit being a Complete
Repository of Original Bon Mots, Epigrams &c   By a Society of Gentlemen
Members of the Club of Odd Fellows . . . London: Printed for H. D.
Symonds, . . . [1800]   _12mo, red straight-grain morocco, Janseniste,
gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Engraved title by Holland, frontispiece, "An Old Story," by Brune after
E. Dayes, and five other plates by R. Heath, Brune, T. Tegg, and
Grignion after E. Dayes and Tegg.


JEST BOOKS.--The Festival of Mirth For 1801; consisting of interesting,
moral, and amusing stories; . . . London: printed by W. Nicholson, . . .
for Thomas Wilson, . . . Price One Shilling. 1801. _12mo, red
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece by R. Williamson after Cawse, coloured by hand. The text of
pages 34 and 36 is reversed, and 37-40 are mixed.


JEST BOOKS.--The Convivial Jester, or Bane of Melancholy; being an
unrivalled collection of the Most celebrated and pointed Jests, Puns,
and Repartees, ever before published in the whole world; . . . Written
and compiled Under the immediate Inspection of that facetious and lively
Writer, Godfrey Broadgrin, Esq. The second edition, Embellished with a
beautiful and appropriate Frontispiece, by a most eminent artist.
London. Printed for the Proprietor, and published by H. D. Symonds, . . .
and T. Hurst, . . . Price only 6d. Plummer, Printer, . . . [n. d.]
_12mo, blue straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges; by The Club
Bindery._

Frontispiece by Heath after Tegg.


JEST BOOKS.--The Gentleman's Companion, or an elegant and lively
selection, of the bon mots, repartees, &c. of the most distinguished
characters, in the brilliant circles of taste and fashion. London:
printed for W. Lane, . . . [n. d.]   _12mo, red straight-grain morocco,
Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece.


JEST BOOKS.--The Humorous Jester; or, Man of Fashion's Companion; being
a collection of jests and humours, . . . By Henry Ranger, author of a
thousand good things. London: printed by and for J. Roach, . . . [n. d.]
   _12mo, olive straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The
Club Bindery._

Frontispiece.


JEST BOOKS.--The Laughing Philosopher; or repository of wit: . . .
Written and compiled for the Sons of Momus, By Jerry Jingle, Esq. of
Jingle-Hall. London: Printed for H. D. Symonds, . . . Price Six-Pence.
Plummer, Printer, . . . [n. d.]   _12mo, blue straight-grain morocco,
Janseniste, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece by Brune after E. Dayes.


JEST BOOKS.--The Laughing Philosopher. [n. d.] _12mo, green
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Another copy, similar to the preceding in all respects through page 36.
Page 37 begins with a paragraph on the word "Sir"; the last page, 48,
ends with "Newspapers." The preceding copy begins on page 37 with verses
called "The Spectacles," and ends on page 48 with "Charles II."


JEST BOOKS.--The Laughing Philosopher's Legacy to Dull Mortals. . . .
London.   Printed for S. Elliott, . . . and W. Harris, . . . Price 6.^{d}
   [n. d.] _12mo, blue straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by
The Club Bindery._

Woodcuts and frontispiece, "The Old Citizen at Vauxhall."


JEST BOOKS.--Laugh when you can; or, the monstrous droll Jester. . . .
To which is added, The Benevolent Jew, as recited at the Royalty
Theatre. London: printed for Ann Lemoine, . . . (Price Sixpence.) [n.
d.]   _12mo, olive straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by
The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "The Compulsive Wedding."


JEST BOOKS.--The Merry Fellow; or Jack Fun's Budget. . . . Gosport:
printed by J. Watts, And Sold by Crosby and Letterman, . . . London.
[n. d.] _12mo, olive straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by
The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "The Rival Candidates," by T. S. Seed.


JEST BOOKS.--New genuine edition.   The New London & Country Jester; or,
Fun for the Parlour & Kitchen. . . . By Peter Cunningham, Esq. Professor
of Drollery at Oxford. Including the most Remarkable Jokes and
Witticisms, used by the late Noted Sir John Fielding, of facetious
memory, . . . London: printed for, and Sold wholesale and retail by,
Alex. Hogg, [n. d.] . . . [Price only 1s. Embellished with a Droll
Frontispiece.] _12mo, blue straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "The Town and Country Jester."


JEST BOOKS.--Rusted's humourous and entertaining Jester Or Pabulum of
Life. Containing a variety of original Jests, entirely new. London:
Sold by R. Rusted, . . . J. Adlard, printer, . . . [n. d.]   _12mo,
brown straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Frontispiece etched by Haynes and coloured by hand.


JEST BOOKS.--Sam Brown's precious collection of merry Jokes; with his
curious Story of the unfortunate little French Pastry Cook. London:
printed for R. Rusted, . . . Six-pence. Bentham, Printer, . . . [n. d.]
   _12mo, blue straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The
Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "Misfortune the First," by Haynes.


JEST BOOKS.--The Town and Country Nut-cracker, or Jack Sharp's Jests. . . .
London, Printed and sold by T. Sabine, No. 81, Shoe Lane. [n. d.]
   _Small 8vo, green straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by
The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece in two compartments.


JEST BOOKS.--The Variety, or The Evening's Entertainment; In a Parcel of
Interesting Novels, Histories, Amours, Intrigues, &c. &c. &c. . . .
London: Bailey, Printer, . . . [n. d.]   _12mo, blue straight-grain
morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece.


JEST BOOKS.--The Whimsical Jester; or, the Humors of High Life.
Calculated for the entertainment of the polite world; . . . London:
printed for J. Sudbury, . . . [n. d.]   Price six-pence. _12mo, red
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "The Amorous Lovers," preliminary blank leaf, A1, and two
final leaves of advertisement, E5 and E6.


JEST BOOKS.--The Humourist: a collection of Entertaining Tales,
Anecdotes, Repartees, Witty Sayings, Epigrams, Bon Mots, Jeu d'esprits,
&c. carefully selected. . . . Vol. I. [Vols. II.-IV.]   London: Printed
and Published by J. Robins and Co. . . . 1822. [1819. 1819. 1820.]
_12mo, four volumes, original decorated boards, uncut edges._

Forty coloured plates by George Cruikshank.


JEST BOOKS.--See Wit.


JEWITT, LLEWELLYNN.--The Wedgwoods: being a Life of Josiah Wedgwood;
with Notices of his Works and their Productions, memoirs of the Wedgwood
and other families, and a history of the Early Potteries of
Staffordshire. By Llewellynn Jewitt, . . . with a portrait and numerous
illustrations. London: Virtue Brothers and Co., . . . 1865. _8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


JEWITT, LLEWELLYNN.--The Ceramic Art of Great Britain from pre-historic
times down to the present day, being a history of the ancient and modern
Pottery and Porcelain Works of the Kingdom and of their productions of
every class by Llewellynn Jewitt . . . illustrated with nearly two
thousand engravings. London Virtue and Co., . . . 1878. _Royal 8vo, two
volumes, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


JOHN CARTER BROWN LIBRARY.--The John Carter Brown Library   The
Dedication of the Library Building   May the seventeenth A. D. M DCCCC
IIII   With the Addresses by William Vail Kellen LL.D. and Frederick
Jackson Turner Ph.D. Providence Rhode Island   M DCCCC V. _8vo, half
cloth, uncut edges._

Presentation copy.


JOHNSON, CHARLES.--Fortune in her Wits. A Comedy. London, Printed for
Bernard Lintott . . . 1705. Price 1s. 6d. _4to, green levant morocco,
gilt fillets, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. A2-A4, a1-a2, and B-I2 in fours, title on A2.


JOHNSON, CHARLES.--Love and Liberty. A Tragedy. As it is to be Acted at
the Theatre Royal in Drury-lane. Written by Charles Johnson, Of the
Middle-Temple, Esq; London; Printed for Bernard Lintott . . . 1709.
Price 1s. 6d. _4to, blue levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by
Mercier._

First edition. A-I in fours, half-title on A1, title on A2. Dedicated
"To the Judicious Criticks Throughout the Town," "From my Chambers in
the Middle-Temple, November 25, 1708"; but never acted.


JOHNSON, CHARLES.--The Wife's Relief: or, the Husband's Cure. A Comedy.
As it is Acted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane, by Her Majesty's
Servants. Written by Mr. Cha. Johnson. [Two lines in Latin]   London:
Printed for Jacob Tonson, . . . 1712. _4to, brown levant morocco, gilt
back, side borders, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A-K2 in fours, title on A1. Dedication to Henry Bentinck,
Earl of Portland.


JOHNSON, CHARLES.--The Generous Husband: or, the Coffee House
Politician. A Comedy.   As it is Acted at the Theatre-Royal in
Drury-lane. By Her Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr. Charles Johnson.
[One line in Latin]   London: Printed for Bernard Lintott . . . and
Egbert Sanger, . . . [1713]   Price 1s. 6d. _4to, green levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A-I in fours, title on A1. Dedicated to Lord Ashburnham.


JOHNSON, CHARLES.--The Victim. A Tragedy. As it is Acted at the Theatre
Royal in Drury-Lane By Her Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr. Johnson
. . . . London, Printed: And Sold by Ferd. Burleigh . . . MDCCXIV. _12mo,
brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Frontispiece by Lud. Du Guernier.

Taken from Racine and plagiarized from the adaptation of Abel Boyer.


JOHNSON, JOHN.--Typographia, or the Printers' Instructor: including an
Account of the Origin of Printing, with Biographical Notices of the
Printers of England, from Caxton to the close of the Sixteenth Century.
A Series of Ancient and Modern Alphabets and Domesday Characters . . .
By J. Johnson, Printer   Longman . . . London: 1824. _8vo, two volumes,
red levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt over uncut edges, by Brany._

Thick and largest paper copy. A Roxburghe Club copy. Portrait of Caxton,
etc.

Johnson was assisted by T. F. Dibdin and other bibliographers.


JOHNSON, SAMUEL.--Irene: a tragedy. As it is Acted at the Theatre
Royal in Drury-lane. By Mr. Samuel Johnson.   London: Printed for R.
Dodsley at Tully's-head in Pall-mall and sold by M. Cooper in
Pater-noster-Row. M DCC XLIX. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt
fillets, uncut edges._

First edition. A1-A4 and B-G3 in eights, half-title on A1, title on A2,
and final leaf of advertisement, G4.


JOHNSON, SAMUEL.--The Vanity of Human Wishes.   the Tenth Satire of
Juvenal, imitated   By Samuel Johnson. London: Printed for R. Dodsley
. . . , and Sold by M. Cooper . . . M.DCC.XLIX. _4to, citron levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, some uncut, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition. A-D2 in fours, title on A1.


JOHNSON, SAMUEL.--The Rambler. Volume first, [second.]

  Nullius addictus jurare in verba magistri,
  Quo me cunque rapit tempestas deferor hospes.

                                          HOR.

London: Printed for J. Payne, at Pope's Head, in Pater Noster Row. M
DCCLIII. _Folio, two volumes, brown morocco, gilt fillets, gilt edges,
by Bedford._

First edition, as published, in numbers. Title and Contents in each
volume, two leaves, Mottos, three leaves. Volume I contains Nos. 1-104,
Tuesday, May 20, 1749--50 to Saturday, March 16, 1751. Volume II, Nos.
105-208, Tuesday, March 19, 1751 to Saturday, March 17, 1752.

Each number consists of three leaves, "Price 2d." with date, and the
notice, "To be continued on Tuesdays and Saturdays." The double date,
1749-50, was dropped after the second number, and No. 3 is headed,
"Tuesday, March 27, 1750." At the end of No. 1 is the imprint: "London:
Printed for J. Payne, and J. Bouquet, in Pater-noster-Row; where
Letters for the Author are received." In No. 2 this reading is changed
to "for the Rambler," and in No. 5, "and the preceding Numbers may be
had" is added and continued to the end.


JOHNSON, SAMUEL.--A Dictionary of the English Language: in which the
Words are deduced from their Originals, and illustrated in their
different significations by examples from the best writers. To which are
prefixed, a History of the Language, and an English Grammar. By Samuel
Johnson, A. M.   London: printed by W. Strahan . . . MDCCLV. _Royal
folio, two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


JOHNSON, SAMUEL.--The Prince of Abissinia. [Rasselas]   A Tale . . .
London: Printed for R. and J. Dodsley, . . . and W. Johnston, . . .
MDCCLIX. _Small 8vo, two volumes, original calf._

First edition.


JOHNSON, SAMUEL.--The Idler . . . London, Printed for J. Newbery, . . .
MDCCLXI. _12mo, two volumes, calf gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

First edition.


JOHNSON, SAMUEL.--A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland. London:
Printed for W. Strahan; and T. Cadell . . . M DCC LXXV. _8vo, maroon
levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by Carayon._

First edition: with final leaf of Errata.


JOHNSON, SAMUEL.--The Lives of the most eminent English Poets; with
critical observations on their Works. By Samuel Johnson . . . London:
printed for C. Bathurst . . . MDCCLXXXI. _8vo, four volumes, red levant
morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Second edition. Portrait of Johnson by Trotter after Reynolds.


JOHNSON, SAMUEL.--The Poetical Works of Samuel Johnson, LL.D. now first
collected in one volume. London. Printed for the editor and sold by G.
Kearsley, . . . 1785. _Small 8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


JOHNSON, SAMUEL.--The Works of Samuel Johnson, L.L. D . . . Oxford.
Printed for William Pickering; London . . . MDCCCXXV. _Royal 8vo, eleven
volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

One of fifty copies printed on large paper, including the Parliamentary
Debates, etc. Portrait of Dr. Johnson by Worthington after Reynolds,
India proof, and (inserted) Westall's illustrations to Rasselas.


JOHNSON, SAMUEL.--Dialogue between Dr. Johnson and Mrs. Knowles. London:
Printed for J. and A. Arch, . . . M DCC XCIX. [Price Six Pence.]
_8vo, calf, side panels blind-tooled, gilt top, uncut edges. Bound with
Sir Joshua Reynolds' "Johnson and Garrick."_


JOHNSON, SAMUEL.--See Beckford, William. Boswell, James.


JOHNSONIANA; or, a collection of bon mots, &c. By Dr. Johnson, and
Others. Together With the choice sentences of Publius Syrus, Now first
Translated into English. London: Printed for J. Ridley, . . . W.
Shropshire, . . . W. Davis, . . . T. Evans, . . . G. Kearsly, . . .
Wallis and Stonehouse, . . . Richardson and Urquhart, . . . and W.
Flexney, . . . M DCC LXXVI. . . . _Small 8vo, Spanish calf, gilt top,
uncut edges._

Portrait of Dr. Johnson by Taylor.


JOHNSONIANA.--The Witticisms, Anecdotes, Jests, and Sayings, of Dr.
Samuel Johnson, during the whole course of his life. Collected From
Boswell, Piozzi, Hawkins, Baretti, Beauclerk, Sir Joshua Reynolds, And
other Gentlemen in the Habits of Intimacy with the Doctor. And a full
account of Dr. Johnson's Conversation with the King. To which is
added, A great Number of Jests, In which the most distinguished
Wits of the present Century bore a Part. By J. Merry, Esq. of
Pembroke College. . . . The third edition, greatly improved. London:
printed for D. Brewman, . . . 1797. _8vo, Spanish calf, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Frontispiece, "Mrs. Thrale's Breakfast Table," by Barlow after
Cruikshanks.


JOHNSONIANA; or Supplement to Boswell.   being Anecdotes and Sayings of
Dr. Johnson collected by Piozzi [and many others]   London: John Murray
. . . MDCCCXXXVI. _Royal 8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Bedford._

Large paper copy, with forty-five portraits and views engraved on
steel.


JOHNSONIANA.--Samuel Johnson   his words and his ways what he said, what
he did, and what men thought and spoke concerning him   edited by E. T.
Mason   New York   Harper & Brothers, . . . 1879. _12mo, cloth._


JOHNSON, SAMUEL, OF CHESHIRE.--Hurlothrumbo: or, the Super-Natural.   As
it is Acted at the New-Theatre, in the Hay-Market. Written by Mr. Samuel
Johnson, from Cheshire. . . . London: Printed for T. Wotton, . . . and
J. Shuckburgh, . . . M. DCC.XXIX. _4to, half calf gilt edges._

The author of this play was a namesake of Dr. Johnson.


JOHNSTON, CHARLES.--Chrysal; or the Adventures of a Guinea: Wherein are
exhibited Views of several striking scenes; with interesting anecdotes
of the most noted persons in every rank of life, through whose hands it
has passed. By an Adept. . . . London: printed for Samuel Richards and
Co. . . . 1822. _Post 8vo, three volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._

Twelve coloured plates.


JOLLY, WILLIAM.--Robert Burns at Mossgiel: with reminiscences of the
poet by his herd-boy. By William Jolly, . . . [cut]   Paisley: Alexander
Gardner. 1881. _16mo, original cloth._

Diagram.


JOMINI, BARON.--Life of Napoleon. By Baron Jomini, General-in-Chief and
Aid-de-Camp to the Emperor of Russia. . . . Translated from the French.
With notes, By H. W. Halleck, . . . New York: D. Van Nostrand, . . .
1864. _8vo, five volumes, half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges._

Volume V is an Atlas containing sixty maps.


JONES, GEORGE.--Sir Francis Chantrey, R. A. Recollections of his life,
practice, and opinions. By George Jones, R. A. London: Edward Moxon, . . .
MDCCCXLIX. _12mo, original cloth, uncut edges._


JONES, HENRY.--Card Essays, Clay's Decisions, and Card-table Talk.   By
"Cavendish," . . . London: Thos. de la Rue & Co. . . . 1879. . . .
_Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait.


JONES, OWEN.--The Grammar of Ornament by Owen Jones illustrated by
examples from various styles of ornament. One hundred folio plates,
drawn on stone by F. Bedford, and printed in colours by Day and Son.
London: published by Day and Son . . . M DCCC LVI _Imperial folio, half
purple morocco, gilt top._

First edition.


JONES, STEPHEN.--See Baker, Reed, and Jones.


JOONES, Z.--The Hermit of Mona, a poem; Saled, a tale of the eleventh
century: with other pieces. By Z. Joones, . . . London: printed for T.
and G. Underwood. . . . 1822. _Post 8vo, boards, uncut edges._


JORDAN, DOROTHEA (DOROTHY) BLAND.--The Life of Mrs. Jordan; including
original private correspondence, and numerous anecdotes of her
contemporaries. By James Boaden, Esq. . . . Third edition. . . . London:
Edward Bull, . . . 1831. _8vo, two volumes, gilt back, side panels, gilt
edges, by Pratt._

_Portrait on India paper by W. H. Worthington after Romney.
Extra-illustrated by the insertion of two hundred and seventy-five
portraits, many being original drawings, and several autograph letters.
The engravings are for the most part in proof state._


JOSEPHINE, EMPRESS.--Memoirs of the Empress Josephine with Anecdotes of
the Courts of Navarre and Malmaison. London: Henry Colburn, . . . 1828.
[-1829.]   _Post 8vo, three volumes, blue morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges._


JOSEPHUS, FLAVIUS.--The Jewish War of Flavius Josephus: a new
translation, by the late Rev. Robert Traill, . . . edited, with notes,
by Isaac Taylor. With Pictorial Illustrations. . . . London: Houlston
and Stoneman, . . . 1851. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, half brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Pratt._

Seventy-five plates.


JOURNAL of Design and Manufactures . . . London: Chapman and Hall, . . .
MDCCCXLIX-LII. _8vo, six volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Volumes I-VI, with two hundred and thirteen fabric patterns inserted,
and many hundred woodcuts.


JOURNAL of Sentimental Travels in the Southern Provinces of France,
shortly before the Revolution; embellished with seventeen coloured
engravings, from designs by T. Rowlandson, Esq. . . . London: published
by R. Ackermann, . . . 1821. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, side
borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First issue, with a list of seventeen plates on the final page under
"Directions to the Binder." Although the title-page calls for this
number, there are eighteen, which in the present copy are in two states.

The list in the second issue includes the plate here omitted: Rural
Happiness at Caverac, page 73.


JOURNAL of Sentimental Travels. 1821. _Royal 8vo, blue levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

Second issue, with the list of plates on the last page increased from
seventeen to eighteen, to correspond with the number in the book,
although the title-page calls for only seventeen.


JOUTEL.--Joutel's Journal of La Salle's Last Voyage A reprint (page for
page and line for line) of the first English translation, London, 1714;
with the Map of the original French edition Paris, 1713, in facsimile;
and Notes by Melville B. Anderson   Chicago   The Caxton Club
mdcccxcvi. _8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

One of two hundred and three copies printed on American hand-made paper.


JUDAH, SAMUEL B. F.--Gotham and the Gothamites, a medley. . . . New
York: published for the Author, and sold by S. King, . . . 1823. _16mo,
original boards, uncut edges._

This satire on New York society caused the imprisonment of the
author-publisher, and the suppression of the work.


"JUNIUS."--Junius. [Letters] . . . London: printed by T. Bensley . . .
1796. _8vo, two volumes, half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Matthews._

Thick paper copy, with engraved title, sixteen copper-plate portraits,
and woodcuts by Bewick.


"JUNIUS."--Junius . . . London: Printed by T. Bensley . . . 1797. The
letter-press title is dated 1799. _8vo, two volumes, red morocco, gilt
back and sides, gilt over edges partially uncut, by Bozerian the
Younger._

Thick paper copy. Twenty-one portraits engraved by Ridley, and numerous
woodcuts by Bewick.

This edition contains all the letters of Junius, Philo Junius, and of
Sir William Draper and Mr. Horne to Junius.


JUSSERAND, J. J.--The English Novel in the Time of Shakespeare by J. J.
Jusserand . . . translated from the French by Elizabeth Lee. Revised and
enlarged by the author. Illustrated. London   T. Fisher Unwin . . . M
DCCCXC. _8vo, vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 52 of sixty-five copies printed on Japanese paper. Frontispiece
portrait of Queen Elizabeth after William Rogers, and sixty-one other
illustrations.


JUSSERAND, J. J.--A French Ambassador at the Court of Charles the
Second. Le Comte de Cominges From his unpublished Correspondence. By J.
J. Jusserand . . . with portraits. London   T. Fisher Unwin . . .
MDCCCXCII. _8vo, vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 56 of sixty-five copies printed on Japanese paper.


JUST VENGEANCE.--The Just Vengeance of Heaven Exemplify'd.   in a
Journal Lately Found by Captain Mawson, (Commander of the Ship Compton)
on the Island of Ascension. As he was Homeward-bound from India.
In which is a full and exact Relation of the Author's being set on
Shore there (by order of the Commodore and Captains of the Dutch Fleet)
for a most Enormous Crime he had been guilty of, and the extreme and
unparallel'd Hardships, Sufferings, and Misery he endur'd, from the
Time of his being left there, to that of his Death. All Wrote with his
own Hand, and found lying near the Skeleton. London: Printed and sold
by the Booksellers. . . . [n. d.]   _8vo, half calf, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges._

Frontispiece containing a skeleton on the seashore.


KALIDASA.--Sakoontala; or the Lost Ring; an Indian Drama, translated
into English prose and verse from the Sanskrit of Kalidasa.   By Monier
Williams &c . . . Hertford: printed and published by Stephen Austin &c
M DCCC LV. _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by A.
Motte._

First edition. Every page surrounded with a border in gold and colours,
sub-titles and other illustrations similarly treated, woodcuts, etc.


KALIDASA.--['S]akoontala or The Lost Ring   An Indian Drama translated
into English prose and verse from the Sanskrit of Kalidasa by Monier
Williams, M. A. . . . New York Dodd, Mead and Company   1885. _4to,
citron levant morocco, back panels and side compartments in a floral
design of red mosaic and gilt, green mosaic borders, tooled, figured
silk linings, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

No. 47 of one hundred and ten copies printed on Japanese paper.


KALIDASA.--['S]akoontala. 1885. _4to, green levant morocco, gilt back,
side borders, doubled with brown morocco, gilt borders, gilt edges, with
the original covers bound in, by Riviere._

No. 1 of four copies printed upon vellum.


KANT, IMMANUEL.--Critick of Pure Reason translated from the original of
Immanuel Kant   London William Pickering   1838. _8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


KEANE, A. H.--The early Teutonic, Italian, and French Masters translated
and edited from the Dohme series by A. H. Keane, . . . with numerous
illustrations London Chatto and Windus, . . . 1880. _Royal 8vo, half red
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


KEATS, JOHN.--Poems by John Keats . . . London: printed for C. & J.
Ollier . . . 1817. _Small 8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


KEATS, JOHN.--Poems. 1817. _12mo, citron levant morocco, rich gilt back
and side border, doubled with citron morocco, gilt border, gilt over
uncut edges, in a citron levant morocco case, by Mercier._

Another copy.


KEATS, JOHN.--Endymion: A Poetic Romance. By John Keats. "The stretched
metre of an antique song."   London: printed for Taylor and Hessey, [by
T. Miller] . . . 1818. _8vo, maroon levant morocco, sides covered with a
floral design, the intervals studded with dots, doubled with red
morocco, maroon borders, filleted, red silk guards, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

First edition; dated from Teignmouth, April 10, 1818, and "Inscribed to
the memory of Thomas Chatterton." Two final leaves of Advertisement
dated May 1, 1818.

B. R. Haydon's copy, with his signature on the title-page. A three-page
autograph letter from Keats to Fanny Brawne is inserted.


KEATS, JOHN.--Lamia, Isabella, the Eve of St. Agnes, and other poems. By
John Keats, . . . London: printed for Taylor and Hessey, . . . 1820.
_12mo, brown levant morocco, rich gilt back and sides, doubled with red
levant, chaplet border, gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

First edition. Portrait of the author inserted, India proof, by Meyer
after Severn.


KEATS, JOHN.--The Poetical Works of John Keats. A new edition. London:
Edward Moxon, . . . 1851. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait by H. Robinson after J. Severn.


KEATS, JOHN.--The Poetical Works of John Keats. With a Memoir by Richard
Monckton Milnes. Illustrated by 120 designs, original and from the
antique, drawn on wood   by George Scharf, Jun., . . . London: Edward
Moxon, . . . 1854. _4to, cloth, uncut edges._

One of one hundred large paper copies printed, with portrait by H.
Robinson after J. Severn.


KEATS, JOHN.-The Poetical Works of John Keats. With a Memoir. . . .
Boston: Little, Brown, and Company. 1866. _12mo, half green cloth, uncut
edges._

No. 13 of one hundred copies printed, with portrait on India paper.


KEATS, JOHN.--(I.) The Letters of John Keats edited by Jno. Gilmer Speed
. . . New York Dodd, Mead & Company [De Vinne Press] 1883   (II.-III.)
The Poems of John Keats with the annotations of Lord Houghton and a
memoir by Jno. Gilmer Speed . . . [Same imprint] _12mo, three volumes,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt over uncut edges, by
David._

One of fifty-five copies printed on Whatman paper; with seven portraits
(three coloured), two facsimiles, and one view.

The coloured portraits in the Letters are in two states, unique
duplicates on satin having been added to the ordinary impressions. In
the Poems, the mask of Keats is in three states: Japan and India paper,
and vellum. Twenty-five proof portraits and scenes have been added,
including five examples after Stothard, for the most part on India
paper.


KEATS, JOHN.--Letters and Poems. 1883. _12mo, three volumes, red levant
morocco, back and sides tooled in bands of fillets, doubled with blue
morocco, floral borders, gilt over uncut edges, in green morocco cases,
by David._

No. 1 of two copies printed on vellum. Inserted are two pages from
Keats' original manuscript of "Cap and Bells."


KEATS, JOHN.--The Poetical Works of John Keats edited by William T.
Arnold   London   Kegan Paul, Trench, & Co., . . . M DCCC LXXX IIII.
_Royal 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, corner
ornaments, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original covers bound in, by
Zaehnsdorf._

No. 35 of fifty copies printed on large paper: with etched portrait on
Japan paper.


KEATS, JOHN.--The Poems of John Keats edited by G. Thorn Drury. With an
introduction by Robert Bridges. London: Lawrence & Bullen . . . 1896.
_Post 8vo, two volumes, half vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, two hundred printed, with a portrait of Keats after
Severn's miniature.


KEATS, JOHN.--Life, Letters, and Literary Remains, of John Keats. Edited
by Richard Monckton Milnes. . . . London: Edward Moxon, . . . 1848.
_Post 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Portrait by H. Robinson after J. Severn, and facsimile.


KEATS, JOHN.--Letters of John Keats to Fanny Brawne   written in the
years MDCCCXIX and MDCCCXX and now given from the original manuscripts
with introduction and notes by Harry Buxton Forman   London   printed
for private circulation MDCCCLXXVIII. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Whatman paper copy, fifty printed, with etched portrait of Keats by
Severn, a private proof.


KEATS, JOHN.--See Rossetti, William Michael.


KEBLE, JOHN.--The Christian Year: thoughts in verse for the Sundays and
Holydays throughout the year . . . Oxford, printed by W. Baxter, for J.
Parker; . . . 1827. _Small 8vo, two volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


KEBLE, JOHN.--The Christian Year thoughts in verse for the Sundays and
Holydays throughout the year [by ----]   London Kegan Paul Trench & Co.,
. . . MDCCCLXXXII. _Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with portrait of Keble, proof on India
paper.


KEELING, WILLIAM.--Liturgiae Britannicae, or the several editions of the
Book of Common Prayer of The Church of England, from its compilation to
the last revision; together with the Liturgy set forth for the use of
The Church of Scotland: arranged to shew their respective variations.
By William Keeling, . . . London: William Pickering. . . . 1842. _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


KEESE, JOHN, _editor_.--The Poets of America: illustrated by one of her
Painters . . . Edited by John Keese. New York: published by S. Colman . . .
1840. [-1842] _12mo, two volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back
and sides, gilt edges, by Barr & Co._

First edition of the First and Second Series. Thirty portraits have been
inserted in this copy which is otherwise illustrated with thirty-seven
etchings, some printed in red.


KEESE, JOHN, _editor_.--The Poets of America. 1840. _12mo, brown
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Matthews._

Another copy of the First Series, with the thirty-seven illustrations.


KEESE, JOHN, _editor_.--The Poets of America: illustrated by one of her
painters . . . Edited by John Keese. London: Charles Tilt, . . . [New
York]   MDCCCXL. _12mo, cloth, uncut edges._

Frontispiece-title in black and bronze and the same illustrations as in
the New York edition, but printed in different colours. A leaf
"Advertisement to the English edition," dated Fleet Street, November,
1839, is substituted for the dedication, "To the Poets of our Country."

The verso of the frontispiece-title bears the imprint of H. Ludwig, New
York; the verso of the title-page of the New York edition, the imprint
of Alex. S. Gould, New York.


KEESE, JOHN, _editor_.--The Poets of America: illustrated by one of her
painters. . . . Edited by John Keese. (Volume Second of the Series.)
Third edition. New York; published by Samuel Colman. . . . 1842. _12mo,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, with the original covers
bound in, by Riviere._


KEESE, JOHN, _editor_.--The Poet's Gift: illustrated by one of her
painters. . . . Edited by John Keese. Boston: published by T. H. Carter
and Company. New York: Collins . . . 1845. _12mo, brown morocco, gilt
back and sides, gilt edges, by Matthews._

Thirty-six illustrations by W. H. Croome, etc.


KELLY, HUGH.--False Delicacy: a comedy; as it is performed at the
Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. By His Majesty's Servants. By Hugh Kelly.
London, printed for R. Baldwin, . . . W. Johnston, . . . and G. Kearsly,
. . . M DCC LXVIII. _8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Dedicated to Garrick, who wrote both Prologue and
Epilogue.


KELTY, MARY ANN.--Reminiscences of Thought and Feeling; by the Author of
Visiting my Relations. London William Pickering   1852. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


KEMBLE, FANNY.--Poems by Frances Anne Butler [Fanny Kemble]
Philadelphia: John Pennington . . . 1844. _12mo, blue levant morocco,
gilt back and side panels in the style of Roger Payne, gilt over uncut
edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Portrait by Cheney after Sully.


KEMBLE, JOHN PHILIP.--Fugitive Pieces . . . written by J. P. Kemble.
York: printed by W. Blanchard and Co . . . MDCCLXXX. _8vo, green
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Hayday._

Kemble was at particular pains to destroy as many copies of this book as
possible, so that very few remain.


KEMPIS, THOMAS A.--Of the Imitation of Jesus Christ, translated from the
Latin original ascribed to Thomas A Kempis; with an Introduction and
Notes. by the Reverend Thomas Frognall Dibdin, D. D. . . . London:
Printed for the Author by W^{m} Nicol . . . published by Wm. Pickering,
and John Major. M DCCC XXVIII. _Royal 8vo, divided into two volumes,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Large paper copy, with an original drawing and ninety selected plates
added, including many rare old copper-plate engravings and proof
impressions of the more modern steel plates.


KEMPIS, THOMAS A.--Of the Imitation of Jesus Christ. Translated from the
Latin original ascribed to Thomas A Kempis by T. F. Dibdin D. D.
London William Pickering   1851. _8vo, blue levant morocco, back and
sides richly tooled, gilt edges, by Bedford._

The engraving "Ecce Homo" is in two states, a fine proof having been
added.


KEMPIS, THOMAS A.--Of the Imitation of Christ by Thomas a Kempis
London C. Kegan Paul & Co., . . . MDCCCLXXXI. _Crown 8vo, original
covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with frontispiece on India paper.


KENNEDY, JOHN PENDLETON.--Swallow Barn, or a sojourn in the Old
Dominion. . . . Philadelphia: Carey & Lea, . . . 1832. _12mo, two
volumes, red morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


KENNEDY, JOHN PENDLETON.--Swallow Barn; or, a Sojourn in the Old
Dominion. By John P. Kennedy . . . revised edition. With Illustrations
by Strother. New York . . . Hurd and Houghton . . . 1866. _12mo, half
brown morocco, uncut edges._


KENNEDY, JOHN PENDLETON.--Horse Shoe Robinson; a tale of the tory
ascendency.   By the author of "Swallow Barn" . . . Philadelphia: Carey,
Lea, & Blanchard. 1835. _18mo, two volumes, half cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._

First edition.


KENNEDY, JOHN PENDLETON.--Horse-Shoe Robinson. A tale of the tory
ascendency. By John P. Kennedy . . . revised edition   New York . . .
Hurd and Houghton . . . 1866. _12mo, half brown morocco, uncut edges._

Frontispiece and vignette.


KENNEDY, JOHN PENDLETON.--Rob of the Bowl: a Legend of St. Inigoe's. By
the author of "Swallow Barn" . . . Philadelphia: Lea & Blanchard . . .
1838. _18mo, two volumes, half cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


KENNEDY, JOHN PENDLETON.--Rob of the Bowl. A Legend of St. Inigoe's. By
John P. Kennedy . . . revised edition. New York . . . Hurd & Houghton
1866. _12mo, half brown morocco, uncut edges._


KENNEDY, JOHN PENDLETON.--Quodlibet: containing some annals thereof,
with an authentic account of the origin and growth of the borough and
the sayings and doings of sundry of the townspeople: interspersed with
sketches of the most remarkable and distinguished characters of that
place and its vicinity. Edited by Solomon Second-thoughts,
School-master, from original MSS. indited by him, and now made public at
the request and under the patronage of the great new light democratic
central committee of Quodlibet. . . . Philadelphia: Lea & Blanchard.
1840. _12mo, red morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


KENNEDY, JOHN PENDLETON.--Quodlibet: containing some annals thereof,
with an authentic account of the origin and growth of the borough, and
the sayings and doings of sundry of the townspeople; interspersed with
sketches of the most remarkable and distinguished characters of that
place and its vicinity. By Solomon Secondthoughts, schoolmaster . . .
Third edition. New York . . . Hurd and Houghton. 1866. _12mo, half brown
morocco, uncut edges._


KENNEDY, JOHN PENDLETON.--The Blackwater Chronicle   a narrative of an
expedition into the Land of Canaan, in Randolph County, Virginia, a
country flowing with wild animals, . . . By "The Clerke of Oxenforde."
With illustrations from life by Strother. Redfield . . . New York. 1853.
_12mo, red morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


KENNEDY, JOHN PENDLETON.--Memoirs of William Wirt, Attorney-General of
the United States. By John P. Kennedy. A new and revised edition   New
York . . . Hurd and Houghton. 1866. _12mo, two volumes, half brown
morocco, uncut edges._

Portrait of Wirt by Walter after King.


KENRICK, WILLIAM.--Falstaff's Wedding: a comedy.   being A Sequel to the
Second Part of the Play of King Henry the Fourth. Written in Imitation
of Shakespeare, By Mr. Kenrick. . . . London: Printed for J. Wilkie, . . .
F. Blyth, . . . T. Lowndes, and W. Owen, . . . Becket and De Hondt, . . .
T. Lewis, J. Walter, . . . and J. Almon, . . . M. DCC. LX. [M. DCC.
LXVI]   _8vo, red straight-grain morocco, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition. The Preface is dated Jan. 1, 1766; therefore the date on
the title-page is obviously a misprint. Dedicated "To M^{r.} Quin, in
return for the frequent pleasure received, by his representation of the
character of Sir John Falstaff."

Title, A1-A4 and B-G2 in eights.


KETTELL, SAMUEL.--Specimens of American Poetry, with critical and
biographical notices . . . By Samuel Kettell. Boston,--S. G. Goodrich
and Co. MDCCCXXIX. _12mo, three volumes, half morocco, uncut edges._


KIDD, JOHN.--On the Adaptation of External Nature to the Physical
Condition of Man, principally with reference to the supply of his wants,
and the exercise of his intellectual faculties. By John Kidd, M. D. . . .
London: William Pickering. 1833. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Bridgewater Treatise No. II.


KIDGELL, JOHN.--The Card . . . London: Printed for the Maker, and Sold
by J. Newbery, . . . M D CC LV. _12mo, two volumes, red morocco, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Coloured frontispiece, and one other plate.


KIDGELL, JOHN.--Original Fables   By the Reverend John Kidgell . . .
London: Printed for James Robson . . . MDCCLXIII. _Small 8vo, two
volumes in one, blue morocco, rich gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by
Birdsall._

The text is in English and French, on opposite pages. A spirited outline
illustration accompanies each of the ninety-four Fables, and two other
plates precede each volume. In 1788 Isaac Reed said he had never seen
any copy but his own, for the author absconded at the time the book was
printed and it was suppressed.


KING, CHARLES WILLIAM.--Antique Gems and Rings. By C. W. King, . . .
London: Bell and Daldy, . . . 1872. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

Fifty-six woodcut and ten copper plates, and numerous illustrations in
the text.


KING, RICHARD JOHN, _editor_.--Handbook to the Cathedrals of England . . .
with illustrations London: John Murray . . . 1861 [-'62-'67-'69]
_Crown 8vo, six volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Maclehose._

Comprises

Northern Division, 2 volumes,
York--Ripon--Carlisle--Durham--Chester--Manchester.

Southern Division, 2 volumes,
Chichester--Canterbury--Rochester--Winchester--Salisbury--Exeter--Wells.

Eastern Division, Oxford--Peterborough--Norwich--Ely--Lincoln.

Western Division, Bristol--Gloucester--Hereford--Worcester--Lichfield.


KING, WILLIAM.--Miscellanies in Prose and Verse. By William King.
London: Printed for B. Lintott . . . _8vo, original calf._

Large and thick paper copy, presented by the author to Dean Swift, with
the latter's autograph and memoranda.


KINGSLEY, CHARLES.--The Saint's Tragedy; or, the True Story of Elizabeth
of Hungary, Landgravine of Thuringia, Saint of the Romish Calendar. By
Charles Kingsley, Junior, Rector of Eversley. With a preface by
Professor Maurice. London: John W. Parker, . . . M. DCCC. XLVIII. _Post
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


KINGSLEY, CHARLES.--Twenty-five Village Sermons. By Charles Kingsley,
Jun., . . . Third edition. London: John W. Parker and Son, . . . M DCCC
LIV. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


KINGSLEY, CHARLES.--Sermons for the Times. By Charles Kingsley, . . .
The second edition. London: John W. Parker and Son, . . . 1858. _Post
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


KINGSLEY, CHARLES.--Phaeton; or, loose thoughts for loose thinkers. By
Charles Kingsley, . . . Third edition. Cambridge: Macmillan and Co. . . .
1859. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._


KINGSLEY, CHARLES.--Andromeda and other poems   by Charles Kingsley . . .
The Third edition. London: Parker, Son, and Bourn . . . MDCCCLXII.
_Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


KINNAIRD, DOUGLAS.--The Merchant of Bruges; or, Beggar's Bush. With
considerable alterations and additions. By the Honourable Douglas
Kinnaird. Now performing, with universal applause, at the Theatre Royal,
Drury Lane. London: printed for Whittingham and Arliss, . . . 1815. . . .
_8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


KINZIE, JULIETTE A. MCGILL.--Wau-Bun the "Early Day" of the North-west
by Mrs. John H. Kinzie of Chicago   New edition, with an introduction
and notes by Reuben Gold Thwaites, . . . With numerous illustrations
Chicago   the Caxton Club M DCCC CI. _8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._

One of two hundred and fifty-six copies printed on hand-made paper.


KIPLING, RUDYARD.--The Story of the Gadsbys, a tale without a plot. By
Rudyard Kipling. Published by Messrs. A. H. Wheeler & Co., Alla-habad.
[1888] _8vo, cloth, with the original covers bound in, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


KIPLING, RUDYARD.--The Light that Failed by Rudyard Kipling London
Macmillan and Co. . . . 1891. _Crown 8vo, original cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


KIPLING, RUDYARD.--Many Inventions by Rudyard Kipling . . . London
Macmillan and Co. . . . 1893 . . . _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


KIRBY, WILLIAM.--On the Power Wisdom and Goodness of God as manifested
in the Creation of Animals and in their History Habits and Instincts by
the Rev. William Kirby, . . . London William Pickering 1835. _8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Bridgewater Treatise No. VII. Sixteen plates after C. M. Curtis.


KIT-KAT CLUB.--The Kit-Kat Club, done from the Original Paintings of Sr.
Godfrey Kneller, by Mr. Faber. Sold by J. Tonson [London] 1735. _Folio,
red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First edition.

Mezzotint title-page and forty-four portraits on forty-three plates, one
being double.


KNAPP AND BALDWIN.--The Newgate Calendar; comprising interesting memoirs
of the most notorious characters who have been convicted of outrages on
the Laws of England since the commencement of the eighteenth century;
with occasional anecdotes and observations, speeches, confessions, and
last exclamations of sufferers. By Andrew Knapp and William Baldwin . . .
London: J. Robins and Co . . . 1824. _8vo, four volumes, mottled calf,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Four portraits and numerous woodcut illustrations.


KNIGHT, CHARLES.--The Old Printer and the Modern Press. By Charles
Knight . . . London: John Murray . . . 1854. _16mo, half green morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges._

Numerous woodcut illustrations.


KNIGHT, JOSEPH.--Life of Dante Gabriel Rossetti by Joseph Knight
London   Walter Scott . . . 1887. _Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._


KNIGHT, SAMUEL.--The Life of Dr. John Colet, Dean of S. Paul's In the
Reigns of K. Henry VII. and Henry VIII. and Founder of S. Paul's School:
with an Appendix containing some Account of the Masters and more Eminent
Scholars of that Foundation; And several Original Papers relating to the
said Life. By Samuel Knight . . . London, Printed by J. Downing . . .
1724. _8vo, purple straight-grain morocco, back and side panels finished
in blind-tooling, leather joints, gilt edges, by C. Lewis._

Large paper copy of the first edition. Portrait by Vertue, and seven
other plates.


KNIGHT, SAMUEL.--The Life of Dr. John Colet, Dean of St. Paul's in the
reigns of K. Henry VII. and K. Henry VIII. and the founder of St. Paul's
School: with an appendix, containing some account of the masters and
more eminent scholars of that foundation, and several original papers
relating to the said life. By Samuel Knight, . . . a new [second]
edition. Oxford, at the Clarendon Press. MDCCCXXIII. _8vo, half blue
levant morocco, gilt back with red roses inlaid, gilt top, uncut edges,
by David._

Two portraits of Colet and six other plates.


KNIGHT, SAMUEL.--The Life of Erasmus, More particularly that part of it,
which He spent in England; Wherein an Account is given of his Learned
Friends, And the State of Religion and Learning At that Time in both our
Universities. With an Appendix containing several Original Papers. By
Samuel Knight . . . Cambridge: Printed by Corn. Crownfield   MDCCXXVI . . .
_8vo, pigskin, uncut edges._

An uncut copy of the small paper edition, with the portrait by Vertue
and sixteen other plates, all indexed, the three extra engravings,
including the portrait of Froben, so often missing, and (inserted) a
proof before letters on India paper of Sir Thomas More and his family.

Dibdin says in his "Library Companion" that he never saw this book in an
uncut state.


KNIGHT, SAMUEL.--The Life of Erasmus.   1726. _8vo, purple
straight-grain morocco, back and side panels blind-tooled with centre
ornament in gold on the back, doubled with a border of red morocco, gilt
edges, by C. Lewis._

Large paper copy, with proof impression of the portraits and plates
(16), and the three extra engravings.


KNOWLES, JAMES SHERIDAN.--The Dramatic Works of James Sheridan Knowles
. . . . London: Edward Moxon, . . . MDCCCXLI [Volume III., M DCCC XLIII.]
   _8vo, three volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by David._

First edition.   Portrait by Finden after Wageman.   Dedication of
Volumes I and II to the Duchess of Kent, of Volume III, dated Dec. 20,
1842, to W. A. Dow.

Volume I contains Caius Gracchus, Virginius, William Tell, Alfred the
Great; or, The Patriot King, and The Hunchback.

Volume II contains The Wife: a Tale of Mantua, The Beggar of Bethnal
Green, The Daughter, The Love-Chase, and Woman's Wit; or, Love's
Disguises.

Volume III contains The Maid of Mariendorpt, Love, John of Procida, Old
Maids, and The Rose of Arragon.


KNOWLES, JAMES SHERIDAN.--George Lovell. A Novel.   By James Sheridan
Knowles, . . . London: Edward Moxon, . . . MDCCCXLVII.   _12mo, three
volumes, half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._


KNOWLES, JOHN.--The Life and Writings of Henry Fuseli, Esq. M. A. R. A.
. . . the former written, and the latter edited by John Knowles, . . .
London: Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, . . . MDCCCXXXI.   _8vo,
three volumes, half purple morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait of Fuseli by Dean after Harlow.


KUGLER, FRANZ THEODOR.--The Schools of Painting in Italy.   Translated
from the German of Kugler by a lady.   Edited, with notes, by Sir
Charles L. Eastlake, . . . with upwards of one hundred illustrations,
drawn on wood, by George Scharf, Jun., from the works of the old masters
mentioned in this book, engraved by John Thompson and Samuel Williams.
Second edition, thoroughly revised, with much additional matter. . . .
London: John Murray, . . . 1851.   _12mo, two volumes, original cloth,
uncut edges._


KUGLER, FRANZ THEODOR.--Handbook of Painting. The German, Flemish,
Dutch, Spanish and French Schools.   Partly translated from the German
by a lady. Edited, with notes, By Sir Edmund Head, Bart.   Illustrated
Edition.   London: John Murray, . . . 1854. _12mo, two volumes, original
cloth, uncut edges._


LACKINGTON, JAMES.--Memoirs of the Forty-Five First Years of the Life of
James Lackington, the present Bookseller in Chiswell-street, Moorfields,
London.   Written by himself in forty-seven Letters to a Friend.   With
a triple Dedication . . . A new edition.   Corrected and much enlarged
. . . to which is also added, an Index.   London: Printed for the Author
. . . M D C C X C I V.   _8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Second edition.   Four portraits of Lackington, and a coloured print of
his shop, inserted.


LACKINGTON, JAMES.--Memoirs of James Lackington, who from the humble
station of a Journey-man Shoemaker, by great industry, amassed a
large fortune, and now lives in a splendid stile, in London.
Containing, Among other curious and facetious Anecdotes, a succinct
account of the Watch nights, Classes, Bards, Love-feasts, &c. of the
Methodists; with specimens of Mr. Wesley's and Mr. Whitfield's mode
of preaching, and the means made use of by them in propagating their
tenets.   Written by himself.   Formerly one of the brethren of Mr.
Wesley's Church.   Newburgh: Printed by D. Denniston, for J. Fellows,
New York.--1796--   _12mo, half calf._


LA FONTAINE, JEAN DE.--Tales and Novels in verse of J. de La Fontaine
illustrated with the eighty fives original plates   by Eisen . . . Paris
J. Lemonnyer . . . 1883.   _8vo, two volumes, original paper, uncut
edges._

No. 35 of one hundred copies printed on Japanese paper. Portrait of La
Fontaine by Ficquet after Hyacinthe Rigault, and of Eisen by Darodes
after Ficquet's drawing from Vispre.

An orthographic curiosity.   Reprinted from the so-called Moore
translation, London, 1814.   The French publisher has not only repeated
the errors of the English edition, but has also created many more;
"eighty-fives" on the title-page being a specimen.


LAING, DAVID.--See Cunningham and Laing. Wilkie and Geddes.


LAMARTINE, ALPHONSE DE.--History of the Girondists; or, Personal Memoirs
of the Patriots of the French Revolution.   From unpublished sources. By
Alphonse de Lamartine, . . . Translated by H. T. Ryde.   London: George
Bell & Sons, . . . 1883.   _Post 8vo, three volumes, red morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges._

Three frontispiece-portraits and three inserted plates, besides an
autograph letter of Mirabeau.


LAMB AND LLOYD.--Blank Verse, by Charles Lloyd and Charles Lamb. London:
printed by T. Bensley; for John and Arthur Arch . . . 1798.   _Small
8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Riviere._

First edition.


LAMB, CHARLES.--John Woodvil a tragedy.   By C. Lamb.   To which are
added, Fragments of Burton, the author of the Anatomy of Melancholy.
London: printed by T. Plummer . . . for G. and J. Robinson . . . 1802.
_Small 8vo, maroon levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


LAMB, CHARLES AND MARY.--Tales from Shakespear. designed for the use of
young persons.   By Charles Lamb.   Embellished with copper-plates. . . .
London: printed for Thomas Hodgkins, at the Juvenile Library,
Hanway-street (opposite Soho-Square), Oxford-street; and to be had of
all booksellers.   1807.   _12mo, two volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt
back, side panels, emblematic corners, gilt edges, by Lortic._

First edition: with twenty plates.


LAMB, CHARLES.--Tales from Shakespeare.   Designed for the Use of Young
Persons.   By Mr. and Miss Lamb.   Sixth edition.   Ornamented with
engravings, from designs by Harvey.   [woodcut]   London: Baldwin and
Cradock, . . . 1838.   _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


LAMB, CHARLES AND MARY.--Tales from Shakspeare. By Charles and Mary
Lamb.   New York: Frank H. Dodd, . . . 1864.   _16mo, half blue
straight-grain morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


LAMB, CHARLES.--Specimens of English Dramatic Poets, who lived about the
Time of Shakespeare: with Notes.   By Charles Lamb London: printed for
Longman . . . 1808. _Crown 8vo, olive morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


LAMB, CHARLES.--Specimens of English Dramatic Poets, who lived about the
time of Shakespeare. With Notes. By Charles Lamb. A new edition . . .
London: Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXXXV. _Foolscap 8vo, two volumes, olive
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


LAMB, CHARLES.--The Adventures of Ulysses. By Charles Lamb. London:
Printed by T. Davison, Whitefriars, for the Juvenile Library, . . .
1808. _12mo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition. Frontispiece and engraved title by Heath after Corbould.


LAMB, CHARLES.--Beauty and the Beast: or, a rough outside with a gentle
heart. A Poetical Version of an Ancient Tale. Illustrated with a series
of engravings, And Beauty's Song at her Spinning Wheel, Set to Music by
Mr. Whitaker. London: Printed for M. J. Godwin, at the Juvenile Library,
. . . [1813]   _16mo, boards, uncut edges, with the original paper
covers bearing the date 1813. Enclosed in a citron morocco case._

First edition. Eight plates, one coloured, and folded leaf of Music
score.


LAMB, CHARLES.--Beauty and the Beast by Charles Lamb, with an
Introduction by Andrew Lang. London: Field & Tuer [n. d.] _Square 8vo,
citron levant morocco, back panels and side corners decorated with a
conventional flower gilt and inlaid in blue morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Kaufmann._

One of ten copies with the eight plates coloured by hand.


LAMB, CHARLES.--The Works of Charles Lamb. In two volumes. . . . London:
Printed for C. and J. Ollier, . . . 1818. _Small 8vo, two volumes, red
levant morocco, gilt back, filleted side panels, gilt top, uncut edges,
by the Marygold Bindery._

First edition. Volume I is dedicated to Coleridge, Volume II to Martin
Charles Burney.


LAMB, CHARLES.--Elia. [28]   Essays which have appeared under that
signature in the London Magazine, [from August, 1820 to October, 1822]
London: printed for Taylor and Hessey, Fleet-Street. 1823. _Crown 8vo,
green levant morocco, gilt back and side borders in compartments,
figured green silk linings, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First issue of the first edition. "Valentine's Day" appeared in _The
Indicator_ February 14, 1821.

The present copy was rebound from the original boards, with paper label,
as issued.


LAMB, CHARLES.--The Last Essays of Elia. Being a sequel to essays
published under that name.   London: Edward Moxon, . . . 1833. _Crown
8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back and side borders in compartments,
figured green silk linings, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Twenty-three essays which appeared in the _London
Magazine_, the _Englishman's Magazine_, the _New Monthly Magazine_, and
the _Athenaeum_ from January, 1823, to February, 1833.


LAMB, CHARLES.--Album Verses, with a few others, by Charles Lamb.
London: Edward Moxon, . . . 1830. _8vo, red morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Stikeman._

First edition. Robert Southey's copy, with his autograph dated Keswick.
31 July, 1830.


LAMB, CHARLES.--Satan in Search of a Wife; with the whole process of his
Courtship and Marriage, and who danced at the wedding. By an Eye
Witness. [vignette] London: Edward Moxon, [Bradbury and Evans,
Printers] . . . M. DCCC. XXXI. _16mo, red levant morocco, gilt back,
side borders, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original pink paper covers
bound in, by J. Larkins._

First edition. Four full-page woodcuts, and one vignette, besides that
on the title-page.


LAMB, CHARLES.--Rosamund Gray: Recollections of Christ's Hospital etc
etc. By Charles Lamb. London: Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXXXV. _Crown 8vo,
olive morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


LAMB, CHARLES.--The Poetical Works of Charles Lamb. A new edition
London: Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXXXVI. _Foolscap 8vo, olive morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


LAMB, CHARLES.--The Letters of Charles Lamb, with a Sketch of his Life.
By Thomas Noon Talfourd, one of his executors. London: Edward Moxon . . .
M D CCCXXXVII. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, olive morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition. Three portraits by E. Smith after William Hazlitt, Finden
after Wageman, and by Brook Pulham.


LAMB, CHARLES.--Final Memorials of Charles Lamb; consisting chiefly of
his Letters not before published with Sketches of some of his
Companions. By Thomas Noon Talfourd . . . London: Edward Moxon . . .
1848. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, olive morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


LAMB, CHARLES.--(I.-III.) The Works of Charles Lamb. In four volumes
[with Life by Sir Thomas Noon Talfourd]   London: Edward Moxon . . .
1850 (IV.) Rosamund Gray, Essays, Poems, etc. By Charles Lamb   London:
Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXLIX. _Post 8vo, four volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

Portrait by Finden after Wageman.


LAMB, CHARLES.--The Works of Charles Lamb. A new edition. . . . Boston:
William Veazie. 1865. _8vo, five volumes, half blue morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._

Portrait by H. Wright Smith after T. Wageman. Large paper copy, one
hundred printed.


LAMB, CHARLES AND MARY.--Mary and Charles Lamb: Poems, Letters, and
Remains: now first collected, with reminiscences and notes. By W. Carew
Hazlitt. With Portrait, and numerous Facsimiles and Illustrations of
their Favourite Haunts in London and the Suburbs. London: Chatto and
Windus . . . 1874. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


LAMB, CHARLES.--A Bibliography of the first editions in book form of the
writings of Charles and Mary Lamb published prior to Charles Lamb's
death in 1834 by Luther S. Livingston   New York   printed for J. A.
Spoor at the De Vinne Press   1903. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

One of ninety copies printed on Van Gelder paper. Six portraits on Japan
paper, and numerous facsimiles.


LAMB, CHARLES.--See Coleridge, S. T.   Proctor, B. W.


LAMBERT, OSMUND.--Angling Literature in England; and Descriptions of
Fishing by the Ancients: with a notice of some books on other
piscatorial subjects. By Osmund Lambert. London: Sampson Low &c
[Chiswick Press]   1881. _Small 8vo, half red levant morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges, with the original vellum covers bound in, by Zaehnsdorf._


LAMBORN, ROBERT H.--Mexican Painting and Painters   A Brief Sketch of
the Development of the Spanish School of Painting in Mexico   By Robert
H. Lamborn, . . . [3 illustrations]   New York 1891.   _4to, cloth,
uncut edges._

No. 100 of five hundred copies printed for the author. Presentation
copy, with autograph letter inserted.


LANCASHIRE BALLADS.--Ballads & Songs of Lancashire Chiefly Older than
the 19th Century.   Collected, compiled, and edited, with notes, by John
Harland, . . . [cut]   London Whittaker & Co. . . . 1865.   _4to, cloth,
uncut edges._


LANCASTER INDIAN TREATY.--A Treaty, Held at the Town of Lancaster, in
Pennsylvania,   By the Honourable the Lieutenant-Governor of the
Province, And the Honourable the Commissioners for the Provinces of
Virginia and Maryland, with the Indians of the Six Nations, In June,
1744.   Philadelphia: Printed and Sold by B. Franklin, at the
New-Printing-Office, near the Market.   M, DCC,XLIV.   _Folio, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Pratt._


LANCIANI, RODOLFO.--Ancient Rome in the light of recent discoveries by
Rodolfo Lanciani, . . . With one hundred illustrations   Boston and New
York   Houghton, Mifflin and Company . . . 1889.   _8vo, cloth, gilt
top, uncut edges._


LANDON, LETITIA ELIZABETH.--The Poetical Works of Letitia Elizabeth
Landon. . . . A new edition. . . . London: printed for Longman, Orme,
Brown, Green, and Longmans, . . . 1839.   _Post 8vo, four volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait by Finden after Maclise and four plates by C. Heath, J.
Mitchell, E. J. Portbury and W. Finden after J. M. Wright, C. C. Pyne,
and H. Howard.


LANDOR, WALTER SAVAGE.--The Poems of Walter Savage Landor.   London:
printed for T. Cadell, jun^{r}. and W. Davies, . . . MDCCXCV.   _8vo,
green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


LANDOR, WALTER SAVAGE.--Gebir, Count Julian, and other Poems.   By
Walter Savage Landor, Esq. London: Edward Moxon . . . 1831.   _Small
8vo, calf gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


LANDOR, WALTER SAVAGE.--Pericles and Aspasia by Walter Savage Landor,
Esq . . . London Saunders and Otley . . . 1836.   _12mo, two volumes,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, narrow side borders, gilt over uncut
edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.   Dedication to the Earl of Mulgrave, Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, Advertisement dated "Villa Fiesolana, July 4, 1835."


LANDOR, WALTER SAVAGE.--Pericles & Aspasia Walter Savage Landor   London
Printed at the Chiswick Press for George Bell & Sons   1903.   _Folio,
original cloth, uncut edges._

Two hundred copies printed, with frontispiece, portrait, and woodcut
title-page by Alfred A. Longden.


LANDOR, WALTER SAVAGE.--The Pentameron and Pentalogia.   London
Saunders and Otley . . . 1837. _12mo, half blue levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

First edition.


LANDOR, WALTER SAVAGE.--Andrea of Hungary, and Giovanna of Naples.   By
Walter Savage Landor. London: Richard Bentley . . . MDCCCXXXIX.   _8vo,
half red levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Krafft._

First edition.


LANDOR, WALTER SAVAGE.--Fra Rupert the last part of a Trilogy.   The
first being Andrea of Hungary, the second being Giovanna of Naples.   By
Walter Savage Landor.   London: Saunders and Otley, . . . 1840.   _8vo,
half red levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Krafft._

First edition.


LANDOR, WALTER SAVAGE.--The Works of Walter Savage Landor. . . . London:
Edward Moxon, . . . M DCCC XLVI. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._


LANDOR, WALTER SAVAGE.--The Hellenics of Walter Savage Landor.
Enlarged and completed. London: Edward Moxon, . . . M DCCC XLVII.
_Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


LANDOR, WALTER SAVAGE.--Imaginary Conversations of Greeks and Romans.
By Walter Savage Landor.   London: Edward Moxon . . . 1853.   _Crown
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


LANDSEER, THOMAS, _editor_.--Life and Letters of William Bewick (Artist)
edited by Thomas Landseer, A. R. A.   London: Hurst and Blackett, . . .
1871. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Bewick by Brown after Macartan.


LANE, EDWARD WILLIAM.--An account of the Manners and Customs of the
Modern Egyptians, written in Egypt during the years 1833,--34,
and--35, partly from notes made during a former visit to that country
in the years 1825,--26,--27, and--28.   By Edward William Lane . . .
The third edition, with large additions and improvements.   London:
Charles Knight and Co., . . . MDCCCXLII.   _8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

One hundred and twenty-eight woodcut illustrations.


LANG, ANDREW.--Ballads and Lyrics of Old France: with other poems.   By
A. Lang.   London: Longmans, Green and Co.   1872.   _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


LANG, ANDREW.--A. Lang XXII Ballades in Blue China [vignette] London C.
Kegan Paul & Co., . . . M DCCC LXXX.   _16mo, blue levant morocco, gilt
back, centre ornaments, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original vellum
covers bound in._

First edition.


LANG, ANDREW.--Helen of Troy by A. Lang. London: George Bell and Sons . . .
1882.   _Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

First edition, with autograph letter of the author inserted.


LANG, ANDREW.--Rhymes a la Mode by A. Lang.   London Kegan Paul, Trench
& Co., . . . MDCCCLXXXV.   _Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

First edition.   Large paper copy, fifty printed, with frontispiece by
Abbey.


LANG, ANDREW.--In the wrong Paradise and other stories by Andrew Lang.
London Kegan Paul, Trench & Co., . . . 1886.   _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


LANG, ANDREW.--Letters to Dead Authors by Andrew Lang.   London
Longmans, Green, and Co. . . . 1886.   _Crown 8vo, half vellum, gilt
top, uncut edges._

First edition.


LANG, ANDREW.--The Mark of Cain by Andrew Lang . . . Bristol J. W.
Arrowsmith . . . 1886. _Foolscap 8vo, original paper covers._

First edition.


LANG, ANDREW.--Books and Bookmen by Andrew Lang London Longmans, Green,
and Co.   1886 . . . _Royal 8vo, boards, uncut edges._

First edition.   No. 33 of one hundred large paper copies printed.


LANG, ANDREW.--Books and Bookmen By Andrew Lang . . . New York   George
J. Coombes . . . [Riverside Press] 1886.   _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

No. 38 of one hundred large paper copies printed, with fourteen
illustrations.


LANG, ANDREW.--Books and Bookmen by Andrew Lang.   London Longmans,
Green and Co.   1887. _8vo, half cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Second edition with additions and illustrations.   Printed on handmade
paper.


LANG, ANDREW.--A. Lang.   XXXII Ballades in Blue China.   London   Kegan
Paul, Trench & Co., . . . MDCCCLXXXVIII.   _Crown 8vo, original covers,
uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed.


LANG, ANDREW, _editor_.--Ballads of Books.   Edited by Andrew Lang.
London   Longmans, Green, and Co . . . 1888 . . . _8vo, half green
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.   No. 18 of one hundred and thirteen large paper copies
printed.


LANG, ANDREW.--Grass of Parnassus.   Rhymes old and new by Andrew Lang.
   London   Longmans, Green, and Co . . . 1888.   _Foolscap 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


LANG, ANDREW.--The Gold of Fairnilee.   By Andrew Lang.   Frontispiece
[in colour] by T. Scott. Drawings [14 in colour] by E. A. Lemann.
Bristol: J. W. Arrowsmith, . . . London: Simpkin, Marshall & Co., . . .
[1888]   _Royal 4to, half vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.   No. 84 of a limited edition printed upon large paper.


LANG AND SYLVESTER.--The Dead Leman and other tales from the French by
Andrew Lang and Paul Sylvester.   London   Swan Sonnenschein & Co . . .
1889.   _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


LANG, ANDREW.--Prince Prigio by Andrew Lang . . . Twenty-seven
Illustrations by Gordon Browne. 1889.   Bristol J. W. Arrowsmith . . .
_Square post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


LANG, ANDREW.--Lost Leaders   by Andrew Lang London   Kegan Paul, Trench
& Co., . . . 1889.   _8vo, original paper covers, uncut edges._

First edition.   No. 86 of one hundred large paper copies printed.


LANG, ANDREW.--How to fail in Literature: a lecture by Andrew Lang.
1890.   London: Field & Tuer . . . _Square 16mo, original covers, uncut
edges._

First edition.


LANG, ANDREW.--Old Friends   essays in epistolary parody by Andrew Lang.
[frontispiece] London. Longmans, Green, and Co . . . 1890.   _Crown 8vo,
half vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


LANG, ANDREW.--Angling Sketches by Andrew Lang with three etchings and
numerous illustrations by W. G. Burn-Murdoch.   London   Longmans,
Green, and Co . . . 1891.   _Royal 8vo, boards, uncut edges._

First edition.   No. 59 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies
printed.


LANG, ANDREW, _editor_.--The Blue Poetry Book edited by Andrew Lang with
numerous illustrations by H. J. Ford and Lancelot Speed.   London.
Longmans, Green, and Co . . . 1891.   _Royal 8vo, boards, uncut edges._

First edition.   No. 32 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies
printed.


LANG AND DOBSON.--The Library by Andrew Lang with a chapter on Modern
English Illustrated Books by Austin Dobson   Second edition   London
Macmillan & Co. . . . 1892 . . . _Royal 8vo, buckram, uncut edges._

No. 93 of three hundred large paper copies printed: three plates (two
coloured) and twenty-two woodcuts.


LANG, ANDREW, _editor_.--The Green Fairy Book edited by Andrew Lang
[vignette]   With numerous illustrations by H. J. Ford   London
Longmans, Green, and Co. . . . 1892 . . . _Royal 8vo, boards, uncut
edges._

First edition.   No. 78 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies
printed.


LANG, ANDREW.-- . . . Prince Ricardo of Pantouflia being the adventures
of Prince Prigio's son, by Andrew Lang . . . Illustrated by Gordon
Browne Published at Bristol by J. W. Arrowsmith, . . . and at London by
Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent & Company . . . [1893.]   _4to, half
vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.   No. 20 of a large paper edition.


LANG, ANDREW.--The Tercentenary of Izaak Walton.   By Andrew Lang.
London: printed for private circulation only.   1893.   _4to, vellum
boards, uncut edges._

Only a few copies printed for private circulation.   Portrait and other
illustrations.


LANG, ANDREW, _editor_.--The Yellow Fairy Book edited by Andrew Lang
[vignette]   With numerous illustrations by H. J. Ford   London
Longmans, Green, and Co. . . . 1894 . . . _Royal 8vo, boards, uncut
edges._

First edition.   No. 124 of one hundred and forty large paper copies
printed.


LANG, ANDREW.--Ban and Arriere Ban a rally of fugitive rhymes by Andrew
Lang.   London Longmans, Green & Co . . . 1894   _8vo, boards, uncut
edges._

First edition.   No. 64 of seventy large paper copies printed, with
frontispiece.


LANG, ANDREW.--See Aucassin and Nicolete. Colonna, Francesco.


LANGHORNE, JOHN.--The Fables of Flora.   By Dr. [John] Langhorne
London: printed by T. Rickaby for E. and S. Harding . . . MDCCXCIV.
_12mo, green levant morocco, gilt back, wide border on the sides, gilt
edges, by Riviere._

Twenty-two illustrations by Stothard and others.


LANGHORNE, JOHN.--The Fables of Flora, by Dr. Langhorne . . . To which
is prefixed a Life of the Author, By F. Blagdon . . . London: printed
for B. Crosby and Co . . . 1804.   _12mo, half blue levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Krafft._

Twenty-two vignettes and floral tail-pieces by Stothard.


LANTHORN BOOK.--The Lanthorn Book being a small collection of Tales and
Verses read at The Sign o' the Lanthorn 126 William Street.   New York
[1898] _Royal 8vo, half ooze calf, uncut edges._

No. 14 of one hundred and twenty-five copies printed: with
illustrations.


LARNED, WALTER CRANSTON.--Churches and Castles of Mediaeval France by
Walter Cranston Larned Illustrated   New York   Charles Scribner's Sons
1895. _12mo, cloth, uncut edges._


LARWOOD AND HOTTEN.--The History of Signboards, From the Earliest Times
to the Present Day. By Jacob Larwood and John Camden Hotten.   With one
hundred illustrations in fac-simile   by J. Larwood. . . . [vignette]
Fourth edition.   London: John Camden Hotten, . . . 1868. . . . _4to,
half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

One of one hundred large paper copies printed, with seventy-two
additional illustrations of ancient signboards, and other reminiscences
of Old London.


LAS CASES, COUNT AUGUSTIN DE.--Memorial de Sainte Helene.   Journal of
the Private Life and Conversations of the Emperor Napoleon at Saint
Helena   by the Count de Las Cases. . . . London: printed for Henry
Colburn and Co. 1823.   _8vo, eight parts in four volumes, blue
straight-grain morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

Two maps, a plan, and a view.


LATHY, THOMAS PIKE.--The Angler; a Poem, in ten cantos: with proper
instructions in the Art, rules to choose Fishing Rods, Lines, Hooks,
Floats, Baits, and to make Artificial Flies; receipts for pastes &c,
and, in short, every article relating to the sport. By Piscator [T. P.
Lathy] [cut] London: Printed for W. Wright . . . and M. Iley . . . 1819.
   _Square 8vo, red morocco, back tooled with appropriate emblems, sides
panelled with a design in relief introducing portraits of Walton and
Cotton, &c., gilt edges._

Large and thick paper copy, only twenty printed, with portrait, proof on
India paper, by Scott after Cooper, and twenty-one woodcuts.


LAVATER, JOHN CASPAR.--Aphorisms on Man: translated from the original
manuscript of The Rev. John Caspar Lavater . . . London: printed for J.
Johnson . . . MDCCLXXXVIII.   _Small 8vo, orange levant morocco,
Janseniste, uncut edges, by R. W. Smith._

William Blake's copy with his autograph, manuscript notes, and a proof
impression of his frontispiece.


LAVATER, JOHN CASPAR.--Essays on Physiognomy, designed to promote the
knowledge and the love of mankind.   By John Caspar Lavater . . .
illustrated by more than eight hundred engravings accurately copied, and
some duplicates added from originals.   Executed by, or under the
inspection of, Thomas Holloway.   Translated from the French by Henry
Hunter, D. D. . . . London: Printed for John Murray, . . . H. Hunter, . . .
and T. Holloway, . . . MDCCLXXXIX (XCII and printed by T. Bensley, . . .
for John Stockdale, . . . 1810.)   _4to, three volumes divided in
five, half green levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Carayon._

Large paper copy.


LAWRENCE, JOHN AND EDWARD.--The Gentleman's Recreation: or the Second
Part of the Art of Gardening improved.   Containing several New
Experiments and Curious Observations relating to Fruit-Trees:
Particularly, a New Method of building Walls with Horizontal Shelters.
Illustrated with Copper Plates. . . . By John Lawrence, M. A. Rector
of Yelvertoft in Northamptonshire.   To which is added by way of
Appendix, A new and familiar way to find a most exact Meridian Line by
the Pole-Star; whereby Gentlemen may know the true Bearings of their
Houses and Garden Walls, and regulate their Clocks and Watches, &c.
By Edward Lawrence, Brother to the Author of this Book. The Second
Edition.   London: Printed for Bernard Lintott . . . 1717.   _Crown 8vo,
calf, gilt top, uncut edges._

Frontispiece of a house and garden, another plate, folded, and four
woodcuts on page 57.


LAYARD, AUSTEN HENRY.--Ninevah and its Remains: with an account of a
visit to the Chaldaean Christians of Kurdistan, and the Yezidis, of
Devil-Worshippers; and an enquiry into the manners and arts of the
ancient Assyrians.   By Austen Henry Layard . . . Third edition
London: John Murray . . . 1849.   _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

One hundred plates, woodcuts, and plans.


LAYARD, AUSTEN HENRY.--Discoveries in the ruins of Nineveh and Babylon;
with travels in Armenia, Kurdestan and the Desert: being the result of a
Second Expedition undertaken for the trustees of the British Museum.
By Austen H. Layard . . . with maps, plans, and illustrations.   London:
John Murray . . . 1853. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


LEE, SIDNEY.--A Life of William Shakespeare by Sidney Lee   Illustrated
library edition   London   Smith, Elder, & Co., . . . 1899 . . . _Royal
8vo, ornamental maroon cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Coloured frontispiece, six photogravures, and eighty-four woodcuts in
the text.


LEE, SOPHIA.--The Chapter of Accidents: a comedy, in five acts, As it is
performed at the Theatre-Royal in the Hay-Market.   Written by Miss Lee.
   London: Printed for T. Cadell, . . . M. DCC. LXXX.   _8vo, morocco, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition.   Prologue by George Colman.


LEE, SOPHIA AND HARRIET.--Canterbury Tales. By Sophia and Harriet Lee.
Revised, corrected, and illustrated with a new preface, by Harriet Lee.
   London: Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley . . . 1832. _Post 8vo, two
volumes, half red morocco, uncut edges._

Frontispieces and vignettes engraved on steel.


LEE, WILLIAM.--Daniel Defoe: his life, and recently discovered writings:
extending from 1716 to 1729. By William Lee.   London: John Camden
Hotten, . . . 1869.   _8vo, three volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._

Woodcut portraits and views.   Volume I contains the Life, Volumes II
and III the Writings.


LEE, WILLIAM.--A Chronological Catalogue of the Works of Daniel Defoe.
By William Lee.   Only twelve copies separately printed.   Not for Sale.
   1869.   _4to, half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Reprinted from Lee's "Life of Defoe," 1869.


LE GALLIENNE, RICHARD.--The Book-Bills of Narcissus an account rendered
by Richard Le Gallienne. Printed and published by Frank Murray Derby . . .
1891.   _8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed.


LE GALLIENNE, RICHARD.--See Gale, Hayes, and Le Gallienne.


LE GRAND, J. B.--Fabliaux or Tales, abridged from French manuscripts of
the XIIth and XIIIth centuries by M. Le Grand, selected and translated
into English verse, [by G. L. Way]   With a preface and notes. . . . [by
G. Ellis]   London: printed by W. Bulmer and Co. . . . 1796 . . . _Royal
8vo, two volumes, red straight-grain morocco, gilt back, side corners,
gilt edges, by Hering._

Large paper copy of the first edition: with fifty woodcuts by Bewick.


LE GRAND, J. B.--Fabliaux or Tales, abridged from French manuscripts of
the XIIth and XIIIth centuries by M. Le Grand, selected and translated
into English verse, by the late G. L. Way, . . . with A Preface, Notes,
and Appendix, by the late G. Ellis, . . . [vignette] A new edition,
corrected. . . . London:   printed for J. Rodwell, . . . by S. Hamilton,
. . . 1815.   _Crown 8vo, three volumes, half green morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._

Second edition: woodcuts by Bewick.


LE GRAND, J. B.--Partenopex de Blois, a romance, in four cantos.
Freely translated from the French of M. Le Grand; with notes: by William
Stewart Rose. London: printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme, . . .
1807.   _4to, original boards, uncut edges._

Two full-page plates and five vignettes after R. Smirke.


LE HOUX, JEAN.--The Vaux-de-Vire of Maistre Jean le Houx, Advocate, of
Vire.   Edited and translated By James Patrick Muirhead, . . . With a
portrait [by J. Richardson Jackson after a miniature] and [7] other
illustrations.   London: John Murray, . . . M DCCC LXXV. . . . _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


LEHRS, MAX.--. . . The Playing Cards of the Master Es of 1466 reproduced
by the heliographic process with an explanatory essay by Max Lehrs
[vignette] Agents of the [International Chalcographical] Society: . . .
London   Bernard Quaritch . . . 1892. _Folio, original boards._

Forty-five figures on thirteen plates.


LELAND, CHARLES GODFREY.--Etruscan Roman Remains in Popular Tradition by
Charles Godfrey Leland . . . London T. Fisher Unwin . . . M DCCC XCII.
_Royal 8vo, decorated cloth, uncut edges._

Coloured frontispiece and sixty-seven illustrations in the text.


LEMPERLY, PAUL.--Vanities in Verse . . . Paul Lemperly, Cleveland.
Printed by F. H. on the Marion Press, Jamaica, Long Island.
MDCCCXCVII.   _12mo, original vellum covers, uncut edges._

Fifty-seven copies printed.


LE SAGE, ALAIN RENE.--The Adventures of Gil Blas of Santillane.
Translated from the French of Le Sage.   By T. Smollett, M. D.   To
which is prefixed a Memoir of the Author, by Thomas Roscoe.
Illustrated by George Cruikshank. . . . London: Effingham Wilson, . . .
1833.   _Post 8vo, two volumes, half maroon levant morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges, by V. Krafft._

Two imaginary portraits by J. Smith after J. K. Meadows, and ten plates
by Cruikshank.


LE SAGE, ALAIN RENE.--The Adventures of Gil Blas of Santillane
translated from the French by Tobias Smollett preceded by a biographical
and critical notice of Le Sage   By George Saintsbury   With Twelve
Original Etchings by R. de Los Rios . . . London J. C. Nimmo and Bain . . .
1881.   _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 41 of one hundred large paper copies printed, with proof etchings on
Japan paper.


LE SAGE, ALAIN RENE.--Asmodeus or the Devil upon two Sticks preceded by
dialogues, serious and comic between two chimneys of Madrid   translated
from the French of Alain Rene Le Sage   With Four Original Etchings by
R. de Los Rios   London   J. C. Nimmo and Bain . . . 1881.   _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

No. 41 of one hundred large paper copies printed, with proof etchings on
Japan paper.


LE SAGE, ALAIN RENE.--The Bachelor of Salamanca translated from the
French of Alain Rene Le Sage by James Townsend   With Four Original
Etchings by R. de Los Rios   London   J. C. Nimmo and Bain . . . 1881.
   _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 41 of one hundred large paper copies printed, with proof etchings on
Japan paper.


LE SAGE, ALAIN RENE.--The History of Vanillo Gonzales surnamed the Merry
Bachelor   translated from the French of Alain Rene Le Sage . . . With
Four Original Etchings by R. de Los Rios   London   J. C. Nimmo and Bain
. . . 1881.   _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 41 of one hundred large paper copies printed, with proof etchings on
Japan paper.


LESLIE, CHARLES ROBERT.--Memoirs of the Life of John Constable, Esq. R.
A. composed chiefly of his letters.   By C. R. Leslie, R. A. . . .
London:   James Carpenter, . . . [Chiswick] 1843.   _4to, half brown
morocco, uncut edges._

First edition.   A presentation copy from the author.   Mezzotint
portrait by David Lucas after Leslie, twenty-two other plates, all by
Lucas after Constable.

Inserted are two autograph letters, one from Constable and one from
Leslie.


LESLIE, CHARLES ROBERT.--Memoirs of the Life of John Constable, Esq. R.
A. composed chiefly of his letters.   By C. R. Leslie, R. A. . . .
Second Edition. London: Longman, . . . 1845.   _4to, cloth, uncut
edges._

Two portraits of Constable, lithographs on India paper, and mezzotints
of "Spring," "Little Roxalana," and "Hampstead Heath;" the last two
being added.


LESLIE, CHARLES ROBERT.--A Hand-Book for Young Painters.   By C. R.
Leslie, . . . with illustrations. [24] London: John Murray, . . . 1855.
   _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


LESLIE, CHARLES ROBERT.--Autobiographical Recollections. By the late
Charles Robert Leslie, R. A. Edited, with a prefatory Essay on Leslie
as an artist, and selections from his correspondence.   By Tom Taylor . . .
London: John Murray . . . 1860.   _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

Portrait of Leslie, engraved by William Holl.


LESLIE AND TAYLOR.--Life and Times of Sir Joshua Reynolds: with notices
of some of his contemporaries. Commenced by Charles Robert Leslie, R. A.
continued and concluded by Tom Taylor, M. A. . . . with portraits and
illustrations.   London: John Murray . . . 1865.   _8vo, two volumes in
four, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Illustrated and extended to four volumes by the insertion of three
hundred and forty plates, including a large number of mezzotint
portraits and other subjects after Reynolds, for the most part proofs,
some in the first state.   Of the other plates, the majority are India
proofs and proofs before letters.


LESLIE, ELIZA, _editor_.--The Gift: a Christmas and New Year's Present
for 1840.   Edited by Miss Leslie. [Volume IV.]   Philadelphia:   Carey
& Hart.   [1839] _12mo, maroon morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt
edges._

Engraved title and eight other plates by J. Cheney, J. B. Forrest, and
others after T. Sully, C. R. Leslie, and others.

Advertisement dated Philadelphia, May 1, 1839.

Contains the first publication of Poe's "William Wilson."


LESLIE, GEORGE DUNLOP.--Our River. . . . By George D. Leslie, R. A.
Illustrations by the author. London: Bradbury, Agnew, & Co., . . . 1881.
   _Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Thirteen full-page India proof illustrations, and twenty-five other
woodcuts.


LESTER, C. EDWARDS.--The Artists of America: a series of Biographical
Sketches of American Artists; with portraits and designs on steel.   By
C. Edwards Lester.   New York: Baker & Scribner 1846.   _8vo, red levant
morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by Trioullier._

Eight portraits engraved by Burt, and a plate by Pease after Inman.


LETTER.--A Letter from a Lady to her Husband Abroad. . . . London:
Printed for J. Roberts, . . . and sold by A. Dodd, . . . and E. Nutt,
. . . M. DCC. XXVIII. _Folio, boards, by The Club Bindery._

Contains the half-title.


LETTER.--A Letter from a Right Honourable Person.   And the Answer to
it, Translated into Verse, as nearly as the different Idioms of
Prose and Poetry will allow.   With Notes Historical, Critical,
Political, &c. London: Printed for W. Nicoll . . . M DCCLXI.   _4to,
paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._


LEVEE.--The Levee.   A Farce.   As it was Offer'd to, and accepted for
Representation by the Master of the Old-House in Drury-Lane, but
by the Inspector of Farces denied a Licence.   London: Printed for M.
Cooper, . . . M DCC XLIV. . . . _8vo, olive morocco, Janseniste, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

The editors of _Biographia Dramatica_ record this play with the note:
"Anon.   We find mention made of this piece in the Appendix to Mr.
Oulton's List, but have never met with it."

"The Levee," by John Kelly, 8vo, 1741, was also "offered to, and
accepted for representation by, Fleetwood, the manager of Drury Lane
Theatre; but was denied a license."

Collation: Title, one leaf (verso blank). "Dramatis Personae," one
leaf (verso blank).   Text, B1-G1 in fours.   Pages 1-42.   G2 blank.


LEVER, CHARLES JAMES.--Arthur O'Leary: his wanderings and ponderings in
many lands.   Edited by his friend, Harry Lorrequer, and illustrated by
George Cruikshank. . . . London: Henry Colburn, . . . 1844. _Crown 8vo,
three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.   Portrait and nine other plates.

Presentation copy from the author, with his inscription on the
title-page.


LEVER, CHARLES JAMES.--Charles O'Malley, the Irish Dragoon.   Edited by
Harry Lorrequer, with [44] illustrations by Phiz.   [H. K. Browne] . . .
Dublin William Curry, Jun and Company. . . . M DCCC XLV. _8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Originally published in the "Dublin University Magazine," 1840.


LEVER, CHARLES JAMES.--The Knight of Gwynne; A Tale of the Time of the
Union.   By Charles Lever, . . . With [40] illustrations by "Phiz"   [H.
K. Browne] . . . London: published by Chapman and Hall.   M DCCC L.
_8vo, two volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._


LEVER, CHARLES JAMES.--The Daltons or Three Roads in Life.   By Charles
Lever . . . with illustrations by Phiz [H. K. Browne] London: Chapman
and Hall . . . 1852.   _8vo, two volumes, half brown levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Pratt._

First edition, bound from the parts, with forty-eight illustrations.


LEVER, CHARLES JAMES.--Roland Cashel.   By Charles Lever, . . . With
[40] illustrations by Phiz. [H. K. Browne] . . . London: Chapman and
Hall, . . . M DCCC LX.   _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


LEVER, CHARLES JAMES.--One of Them by Charles Lever, . . . With [30]
illustrations by Phiz.   London: Chapman and Hall, . . . M DCCC LXI. . . .
_8vo, brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.   The dedication to James Whiteside, M. P., is dated
Spezia, December 20, 1860.   On the fly-leaf is the inscription, "With
the Authors respects."


LEVER, CHARLES JAMES.--Barrington.   By Charles Lever, . . . With [25]
illustrations by Phiz. [H. K. Browne] London: Chapman and Hall, . . .
1863. . . . _8vo, original cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


LEVER, CHARLES JAMES.--Tony Butler . . . William Blackwood and Sons
Edinburgh and London M D CCC LXV . . . _Crown 8vo, three volumes,
original green cloth, uncut edges._

First edition in book form.   Originally published in _Blackwood's
Magazine_

On the half-title is the inscription, "To my old & much valued friend G.
Hamilton Seymour fr the author C. L."


LEVER, CHARLES JAMES.--Luttrell of Arran by Charles Lever, . . . with
illustrations (31) by "Phiz" [H. K. Browne]   London: Chapman and Hall
. . . MDCCCLXV.   _8vo, half blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by R. de Coverly._

First edition.


LEWES, GEORGE HENRY.--The History of Philosophy from Thales to Comte.
By George Henry Lewes. Third edition. . . . London: Longmans, Green, and
Co. 1867. . . . _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


LEWIS, GEORGE.--A series of Groups, illustrating the Physiognomy,
Manners, and Character of the People of France and Germany.   By George
Lewis.   London. Published for the Author, by John and Arthur Arch, . . .
1823.   _4to, half morocco, uncut edges._

Fifty-two plates, printed on India paper, and indexed as sixty
illustrations.   They were made for Dibdin's "Tour in France and
Germany."


LEWIS, JOHN.--The Life of Mayster Wyllyam Caxton, of the Weald of Kent;
the First Printer in England.   In which is given an Account of the Rise
and Progress of the Art of Pryntyng in England, during his Time, till
1493.   Collected by John Lewis, Minister of Mergate in Kent   London:
Printed in the Year M DCCXXXVII.   _8vo, red morocco, gilt back, corner
ornaments on the sides, wide inside borders, vellum linings, gilt
edges._

Portrait of Caxton by Bagford, and two plates of paper-marks.


LEWIS, JOHN.--The Life of Mayster Wyllyam Caxton.   1737.   _8vo, grey
morocco, gilt back and side panels, crest and monogram T. W. on the
sides, gilt edges, by Lewis._

Large and thick paper copy, one hundred and fifty printed. The author's
own copy, with his manuscript additions and corrections.


LEWIS, MATTHEW GREGORY.--The Monk.   A Romance . . . By M. G. Lewis,
Esq. M. P.   Waterford: Printed for J. Saunders: 1796.   _12mo, three
volumes, citron levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

Second edition.   To avert prosecution (on account of its immorality)
for the publication of this work, Lewis pledged himself to recall the
printed copies of the first edition, 1795, and to omit the objectionable
passages in future editions.   It is difficult, therefore, to procure a
copy of the first impression.


LEWIS, MATTHEW GREGORY.--The Monk: a romance.   By M. G. Lewis.   Paris:
printed for Theophilus Barrois, junior . . . M D C C C V I I.   _12mo,
three volumes in two, half grey morocco, uncut edges._


LEWIS, MATTHEW GREGORY.--Tales of Wonder: written and collected by M. G.
Lewis, Esq. M. P. . . . London: printed by W. Bulmer and Co. . . . and
sold by J. Bell, . . . 1801. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, green levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery_.

Large paper copy.


LEWIS, THOMAS.--Origines Hebraeae: the Antiquities of the Hebrew
Republick.   In four books.   I. The Origin of the Hebrews . . . II The
Ecclesiastical Government . . . III Places of Worship . . . IV The
Religion of the Hebrews . . . Design'd as an Explanation of every Branch
of the Levitical Law, and of all the Ceremonies and Usages of the
Hebrews, both Civil and Sacred.   By Thomas Lewis London:   Printed for
Sam. Illidge . . . and John Hooke . . . MDCCXXIV.-V. _8vo, four volumes,
Cambridge panelled calf, gilt back and sides, red edges, by Bedford._


LIBERTINE'S CHOICE.--The Libertine's Choice: or, The Mistaken
Happiness of the Fool in Fashion. London: Printed and Sold by H.
Hills, . . . 1709. _Small 8vo, paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._


LIECHTENSTEIN, MARIE, PRINCESS.--Holland House.   By Princess Marie
Liechtenstein, [portrait] with numerous illustrations . . . Second
Edition.   London: Macmillan and C^{o}   1874.   _8vo, two volumes, blue
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

In addition to the thirteen steel plates and facsimiles and eighty-eight
woodcuts issued with these volumes, one hundred and ten portraits and
views have been inserted, forty of this number being proofs on India
paper.


LIEVRE, EDOUARD.--Art Gems.   A series of thirty high-class engravings
from pictures by the most eminent painters, ancient and modern.
Produced under the direction of Edouard Lievre, with notices of the
artists and their works.   Henry Sotheran, . . . London, . . . [Chiswick
Press]   1873.   _Folio, cloth, uncut edges._


LIEVRE, EDOUARD.--Works of Art in the Collections of England drawn by
Edouard Lievre . . . and engraved by Bracquemond, Courtry, Flameng,
Greux, Le Rat, Lhermitte, J. Lievre, Muzelle, Rajon, Randall and
Valentin.   Holloway and Son . . . London [n. d.] _Folio, uncut edges,
in half cloth portfolio._

Only five hundred copies printed.   Fifty plates on India paper.


LILLO, GEORGE.--Lillo's Dramatic Works with Memoirs of the Author by
Thomas Davies.   Second Edition improved. . . . London.   Printed for W.
Lowndes . . . 1810.   _12mo, two volumes, sprinkled calf, citron edges,
by Bedford._


LINDLEY, JOHN.--The Pomological Magazine; or, figures and descriptions
of the most important varieties of Fruit cultivated in Great Britain
London: James Ridgway . . . MDCCCXXVIII. &c.   _Royal 8vo, three
volumes, green morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Bedford._

The complete work with the final title-pages, "Pomologia Britannica,"
dated 1841.   The plates are one hundred and fifty-two in number,
coloured, chiefly by Mrs. Withers.


LINDSAY, ALEXANDER WILLIAM CRAWFORD, LORD.--Sketches of the History of
Christian Art.   By Lord Lindsay London: John Murray . . . 1847.   _8vo,
three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


LINGARD, JOHN.--The History of England, from the first Invasion by the
Romans to the Accession of William and Mary In 1688.   By John Lingard,
D. D. Copyright edition, with ten portraits newly etched by Damman. . . .
London: J. C. Nimmo & Bain, . . . 1883.   _8vo, ten volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

No. 2 of one hundred and fifty copies printed, with extra proof
impressions of the ten portraits on India paper.


LIPPMANN, FRIEDRICH.--The Art of Wood-Engraving in Italy in the
Fifteenth Century by Friedrich Lippmann . . . English edition with
extensive corrections and additions by the author, which have not
appeared in the German original.   London   Bernard Quaritch
MDCCCLXXXVIII.   _Imperial 8vo, half orange morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Fifty-nine illustrations in facsimile accompany the text.


LIPPMANN, FRIEDRICH.--. . . 1895   The Seven Planets by F. Lippmann
translated by Florence Simmonds [vignette]   Agents of the
[International Chalcographical] Society: London   Asher & Co. . . .
_Folio, buckram, gilt top, uncut edges._

Forty-three plates and four woodcuts in the text.


LIVINGSTON, WILLIAM.--The Independent Reflector: or, Weekly Essays on
Sundry Important Subjects. More particularly adapted to the Province of
New-York. . . . New-York: [James Parker] Printed (until tyrannically
suppressed) in M D CCLIII.   _Folio, original dark brown morocco, gilt
back, side borders, gilt edges.   Bound with two other works._

The first magazine published in New York City, in fifty-two numbers,
from Thursday, November 30, 1752, through Thursday, November 22, 1753.

The tone of the Essays was such that the writer was denounced from the
pulpit and the printer menaced into discontinuance of the publication.

The present copy contains the preliminary leaf of Advertisement, the
general title, and the Preface of thirty-one pages, dated New York,
January 19, 1753.

Bookplate of William Peartree Smith, engraved by Thomas Johnston.


LIVINGSTONE, DAVID.--Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa;
including a sketch of sixteen years' residence in the interior of
Africa; and a journey from the Cape of Good Hope to Loanda on the west
coast; thence across the continent, down the river Zambesi, to the
Eastern Ocean. By David Livingstone, . . . [vignette]   With portrait,
maps by Arrowsmith, and numerous illustrations.   London: John Murray,
. . . 1857. . . . _8vo, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges._


LIVINGSTONE, DAVID AND CHARLES.--Narrative of an Expedition to the
Zambesi and its Tributaries; and of the discovery of the Lakes Shirwa
and Nyassa.   1858-1864. By David and Charles Livingstone.   [vignette]
With map and illustrations.   London: John Murray, . . . 1865. . . .
_8vo, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


LLOYD, CHARLES.--Poems on various subjects by Charles Lloyd. . . .
Carlisle: printed by F. Jollie, for J. Richardson, Penrith; and sold by
C. Law, London; T. Pearson, Birmingham.   M,DCC,XCV.   _8vo, half red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition: with the final leaf of Errata, N4.


LLOYD, CHARLES.--The Duke D'Ormond, a tragedy; and Beritola, a tale.
By Charles Lloyd.   London: Longman, Hurst, &c . . . 1822.   _Post 8vo,
green levant morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


LLOYD, CHARLES.--See Coleridge, S. T. Lamb, Charles.


LLOYD, ROBERT.--See Arne, Thomas A.


LOBEIRA, VASCO.--Amadis of Gaul, by Vasco Lobeira.   [from the Spanish
version of Garciordonez de Montalvo, by Robert Southey]   London:
Printed by N. Biggs . . . for T. N. Longman and O. Rees . . . 1803.
_12mo, four volumes, sprinkled calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Bedford._


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--London Lyrics.   By Frederick Locker.
London: Basil Montagu Pickering . . . 1862.   _Post 8vo, brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

This volume of poems was extended and rearranged in subsequent editions
after its first appearance in 1857.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--London Lyrics by Frederick Locker.   Sixth
edition.   Strahan & Co . . . London 1872.   _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

Includes eleven pieces "now first collected and published."


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--London Lyrics   By Frederick Locker
Seventh edition   W. Isbister & Co. . . . London 1874.   _Post 8vo,
boards, uncut edges._

Cosmopolitan Club edition, with presentation leaf signed by the author,
and eight pieces "now first collected and published."


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--London Lyrics by Frederick Locker   a new
edition enlarged and finally revised.   Henry S. King & Co.   London
1876. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait. Mr. Locker stated that a fourth of this edition was
destroyed by a fire at his publisher's.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--London Lyrics by Frederick Locker.   London
[printed by Whittingham] 1881.   _8vo, vellum, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed.   One of six copies with
frontispiece in two states, one on India paper.   India proof portrait
of Locker inserted; and India proof illustration at page 102.   The
illustrations are by Caldecott and Kate Greenaway. Autograph letters of
Locker and Kate Greenaway inserted.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--London Lyrics by Frederick Locker.   New
York   Printed for the Book Fellow's Club 1883.   _16mo, cloth, uncut
edges._

Etched portrait and numerous woodcuts.   Ninety-four copies printed on
Holland paper for the Bookfellow's Club.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--London Lyrics by Frederick Locker.   New
York White, Stokes, & Allen 1884.   _16mo, original covers, uncut
edges._

Portrait by Du Maurier.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--London Lyrics by Frederick Locker   London
Kegan Paul, Trench & Co MDCCCLXXXV.   _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt
back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with etched portrait of Locker and the
"Fairy Connoisseurs," frontispiece by Cruikshank.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--A Selection from the Works of Frederick
Locker.   With illustrations by Richard Doyle. London: Edward Moxon &
Co., . . . 1865.   _Square post 8vo, original cloth covers designed by
Leighton, uncut edges._

First edition.   Etched portrait of Locker by Millais, and nineteen
other illustrations.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK, _editor_.--Lyra Elegantiarum   a collection
of some of the best specimens of Vers de Societe and Vers d'Occasion in
the English language by deceased authors.   Edited by Frederick Locker
. . . London: Edward Moxon & Co., . . . 1867.   _Foolscap 8vo, cloth gilt,
uncut edges._

First edition.   The selection from Landor, forty pieces, was omitted in
later editions.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK, _editor_.--Lyra Elegantiarum a collection of
some of the best social and occasional verse by deceased English
authors.   Revised and enlarged edition. Edited by Frederick
Locker-Lampson, Assisted by Coulson Kernahan.   Ward, Lock, and Co.,
London, . . . 1891.   _4to, half vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 35 of two hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with etched
portrait.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--Poems by Frederick Locker   [Not Published]
   London: John Wilson . . . 1868.   _Crown 8vo, half morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges_.

One hundred copies printed by Whittingham, frontispiece by George
Cruikshank.   Presentation copy from the author with his autograph.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--Poems. 1868. _8vo, half morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges_.

Large paper copy, twenty printed, of which but thirteen contain coloured
impressions of the frontispiece by George Cruikshank, as in this copy.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--Poems. 1868. _Square 8vo, half morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges_.

Another large paper copy, with the frontispiece by Cruikshank coloured.
   A letter from Locker is inserted in which he gives a chronological
list of the various editions of his books.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--Patchwork by Frederick Locker.   London
Smith, Elder, & C^{o}., . . . 1879.   _Post 8vo, blue levant morocco,
maroon russia linings, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition.   Large paper copy, presented by the author to Henry G.
Bohn.


LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.--The Rowfant Library.   A Catalogue of the
Printed Books, Manuscripts, Autograph Letters, Drawings and Pictures,
collected by Frederick Locker-Lampson.   Bernard Quaritch, London, 1886.
   _8vo, half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges_.

One hundred and fifty copies printed, with etched frontispiece by George
Cruikshank, one of the first two hundred and fifty impressions of the
plate, and a poem by Andrew Lang.


LOCKHART, JOHN GIBSON.--See Spanish Ballads.


LOCKMAN, JOHN.--Pastoral Stanzas.   Written on Occasion of the
Marriage of C. Phipps, Esquire, With the Honourable Miss Lepel
Hervey.   By Mr. Lockman. . . . London, M DCC XLIII.   _4to, paper
wrappers, by The Club Bindery._


LOCKMAN, JOHN.--To the long-conceal'd First Promoter of the Cambrick and
Tea-Bills: an epistle. Writ at the Close of Last Session of
Parliament.   By Mr. Lockman. . . . London: Printed for the Author; and
Sold by M. Cooper, . . . M DCC XLVI. . . . _4to, paper wrappers, by The
Club Bindery._

Contains the final leaf of Advertisement.


LODGE, EDMUND.--Portraits of Illustrious Personages of Great Britain.
Engraved from authentic pictures in the galleries of the nobility and
the public collections of the country.   With biographical and
historical memoirs of their lives and actions, by Edmund Lodge, . . .
London: printed for Harding, Mavor, and Lepard. 1835.   _4to, twelve
volumes, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.   Two hundred and forty plates in two states, proofs
before and after letters, and cancels.


LOFTIE, W. J., _editor_.--The Latin Year   Compiled by the Rev. W. J.
Loftie, . . . With illustrations by Robert Bateman.   London   Basil
Montagu Pickering . . . [Chiswick Press] 1873.   _8vo, citron levant
morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Printed upon vellum.


LOFTIE, W. J.--Catalogue of the Prints and Etchings of Hans Sebald
Beham, painter, of Nuremberg, citizen of Frankfort, 1500-1550.   London:
Mrs. Noseda, . . . 1877.   _Small 8vo, vellum boards, uncut edges._

One hundred copies printed on drawing paper.


LOFTIE, W. J.--A History of London.   By W. J. Loftie, . . . with maps
and illustrations. . . . London: Edward Stanford, . . . 1883.   _8vo,
two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


LOFTIE, W. J.--Kensington Picturesque & Historical   by W. J. Loftie, . . .
with upwards of three hundred illustrations (some in colours)   By
William Luker Jun.   from drawings taken on the spot. . . . London
Field and Tuer, . . . M DCCC LXXXVIII. _Royal 8vo, cloth._


LONDON.--Select Views of London and its Environs; containing A
Collection of highly-finished engravings, from original paintings and
drawings, accompanied by copious letter-press descriptions of such
objects in the Metropolis and the Surrounding Country as are most
remarkable for Antiquity, Architectural Grandeur, or Picturesque Beauty.
   London: published by Vernor and Wood &c 1804.   _Royal 4to, half brown
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Large paper copy, with the sixty-five illustrations duplicated by a set
on India paper, and in addition many in a third state,--the engraver's
etching.


LONG VACATION.--The Long Vacation: a Satyr.   Adddres'd to all
Disconsolate Traders.   London: Printed and Sold by H. Hills, . . .
1709.   _Small 8vo, paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH, _editor_.--Novelas Espanolas.   El Serrano
de las Alpujarras; y el Cuadro misterioso.   [By George W. Montgomery]
Brunswick: imprenta de Griffin . . . 1830.   _12mo, blue levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt edges, by David._

First edition.   Preface by Longfellow.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Syllabus de la Grammaire Italienne.   Par
H. W. Longfellow, . . . Boston: Gray et Bowen: MDCCCXXXII.   _12mo,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH, _translator_.--Coplas de Don Jorge
Manrique, translated from the Spanish, with an Introductory Essay on the
Moral and Devotional Poetry of Spain.   By Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.
Boston: Allen and Ticknor.   1833.   _12mo, brown levant morocco, gilt
back, side panel, gilt top, by Alfred Matthews._

First edition of Longfellow's first separate publication, containing
nine sonnets, of which only seven have been retained in subsequent
editions.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Outre-Mer; a Pilgrimage beyond the Sea.
N^{o}. I. . . . Boston: Hilliard, Gray, & Co.   [Printed by J. Griffin,
Brunswick, Maine] M DCCC XXXIII.   _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

First edition of Volume I.   The publication in numbers was discontinued
after No. II, 1834, and the whole work appeared in 1835.   See the
following item.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Outre-Mer; a pilgrimage beyond the
sea.--New York: published by Harper & brothers, . . . 1835.   _12mo, two
volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by David._

Second edition, but the first edition of the complete work. Two chapters
in Volume I and the whole of Volume II are new.   In Volume II "Coplas
de Manrique" and its introductory essay are reprinted.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Hyperion, a Romance.   By the author of
"Outre-Mer."   New York: . . . Samuel Colman, . . . 1839.   _12mo, two
volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Rousselle._

First edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Voices of the Night.   By Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow. Cambridge: published by John Owen.   M DCCC XXXIX. _Small
8vo, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Poems on Slavery.   By Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow   Cambridge: . . . John Owen   MDCCCXLII.   _16mo, blue
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition, with the original glazed paper covers and the inscription
"Samuel Rogers Esq. from the Author."


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--The Belfry of Bruges and other Poems.   By
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.   Cambridge: . . . John Owen. 1846. _12mo,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition, with the original white and gold covers, and date 1845
preserved.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH, _editor_.--The Estray: A Collection of
Poems . . . Boston: William D. Ticknor & Co.   1847.   _16mo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

The "Proem" only, "Once Into a Quiet Village," is by Longfellow, the
other pieces are early contributions by Bryant, Lowell, Whittier,
Emerson, and others.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Evangeline, a tale of Acadie.   By Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow. Boston:   William D. Ticknor & Company. 1847.
_16mo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, uncut edges, in a citron levant
case elaborately tooled, by Riviere._

First edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--H. W. Longfellow   Evangeline conte
d'Acadie traduit   Par Charles Brunel deuxieme edition illustree de 45
vignettes sur bois   Par Jane E. Benham, Birket Foster et John Gilbert
Paris . . . Hachette et Cie . . . 1872.   _8vo, half blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

One of the few copies printed on India paper, with the original covers.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Kavanagh, a Tale.   By Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow Boston: Ticknor, Reed, and Fields.   MDCCCXLIX. _16mo, blue
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Kavanagh: a tale.   By Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow. . . . Illustrated with [40] original designs by Birket
Foster, engraved by H. N. Woods.   London: W. Kent and Co. . . .
MDCCCLVIII.   _8vo, cloth, gilt edges_.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Kavanagh. Forty touched proofs of the
illustrations after designs by Birket Foster, on India paper.   [London
1858]   _4to, half green morocco._


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--The Seaside and the Fireside.   By Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow. Boston: Ticknor, Reed and Fields.   MDCCCL. _16mo,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Meunier._

First edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--The Golden Legend.   By Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow, [woodcut of a cross] Boston: Ticknor, Reed, and Fields. M
DCCC LI.   _12mo, citron levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First issue of the first edition.   "This is one of the few poems of
Longfellow in which the text of the first edition differs from that in
current impressions, the part spoken by the girl and all allusions to
her, in the Refectory scene, being suppressed in later editions."


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--The Golden Legend.   By Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow, [woodcut of a cross]   Boston: Ticknor, Reed, and Fields.
M DCCC LII.   _12mo, original cloth._

Second issue of the first edition, although dated 1852 instead of 1851.
   The sheets are the same in both issues.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--La Legende Doree et poemes sur l'esclavage
de W. W. Longfellow traduits par Paul Blier et Edward MacDonnell suivis
de quelques poesies par P. B. . . . Valenciennes L. Henry . . . 1864.
_8vo, half blue morocco, gilt back, uncut edges._

No. 19 of twenty-five copies printed on vellum paper.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--The Song of Hiawatha.   By Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow. Boston: Ticknor and Fields, MDCCCLV.   _16mo, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--The Courtship of Miles Standish, and other
poems.   By Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.   Boston: Ticknor and Fields.
M DCCC LVIII.   _12mo, original cloth, gilt edges._

First edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Tales of a Wayside Inn.   by Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow. Boston: Ticknor and Fields.   1863.   _12mo, blue
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over marbled edges, by David._

First edition, with woodcut frontispiece.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--The Complete Works of Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow. Revised edition   Boston, Ticknor and Fields   1866. _12mo,
seven volumes, orange levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by David._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed.   Autograph letter of Longfellow
to Dr. Abbott inserted, also eight portraits and twenty-five views, for
the most part proofs on India paper.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Flower-de-Luce. By Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow.   With illustrations   Boston: Ticknor and Fields.   1867.
_Square 16mo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by David._

First edition, frontispiece and four other woodcuts engraved by Anthony.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--The New-England Tragedies.   By Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow. I. John Endicott.   II. Giles Corey of the Salem
Farms.   Boston: Ticknor and Fields.   1868.   _12mo, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Meunier._

First edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--The Divine Tragedy, by Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow Boston   James R. Osgood and Co   1871.   _16mo, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by Meunier._

One of two editions published in 1871.   The other is an 8vo, printed on
thick paper in larger type.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Three Books of Song.   By Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow Boston: James R. Osgood and Company   1872.   _16mo, blue
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Meunier._

First edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Aftermath. By Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.
   Boston: James R. Osgood and Company, . . . 1873.   _16mo, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Meunier._

First edition, with woodcut frontispiece.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--The Masque of Pandora and other poems   by
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow   Boston   James R. Osgood and Company . . .
1875.   _12mo, original cloth._

First edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Excelsior by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
With [15] Illustrations [by A. R. Waud, W. Homer, T. Moran, J. McEntee,
Charles Kendrick, A. V. S. Anthony, and F. T. Merrill] Boston   James R.
Osgood and Company . . . 1878. _Square 12mo, original cloth, gilt
edges._

First separate published edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--Keramos and other poems   by Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow Boston   Houghton, Osgood & Company . . . 1878.
_12mo, original cloth._

First edition.


LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.--See Bryant, William Cullen.   1826.


LONGFELLOWIANA.--The Longfellow Collectors' Hand-book   A Bibliography
of First Editions   New York William Evarts Benjamin . . . 1885.
_16mo, half vellum, uncut edges._

No. 77 of two hundred and fifty copies printed.   Presentation copy from
the editor, Beverly Chew.


LOOKER-ON, THE.--See British Essayists.


LORRAINE, CLAUDE DE.--Liber Veritatis.   Or, a Collection of two hundred
prints, after the original designs of Claude de Lorrain, in the
collection of His Grace the Duke of Devonshire, executed by Richard
Earlom, in the manner and taste of the drawings.   To which is added a
descriptive catalogue of each print.   Together with The Names of
those for whom, and of the Places for which the Original Pictures were
first painted, (Taken from the Hand-writing of Claude de Lorrain
himself on the Back of each Drawing) and Of the present Possessors
of many of the Original Pictures. . . . Published by the Proprietor,
John Boydell, Engraver, . . . London. M DCC LXXVII. [-M DCCCXIX]
_Folio, three volumes, scored russia, gilt back, gilt and blind-tooled
side borders, gilt edges._

First edition.   Mezzotint portraits of Claude by Josiah Boydell, of
Richard Earlom by Lupton after Stuart, and, inserted, a portrait of
Alderman John Boydell by B. Smith after C. Borckhardt. In each volume
are one hundred aquatints after Claude.

Volume III is published by Hurst, Robinson, and Co., 1819.

The Beckford copy.


LOSSING, BENSON JOHN.--The Pictorial Field-Book of the Revolution; or,
illustrations, by pen and pencil, of the History, Biography, Scenery,
Relics, and Traditions of the War for Independence.   By Benson J.
Lossing. With several hundred engravings on wood by Lossing and Barritt,
chiefly from original sketches by the author. . . . New York: Harper &
Brothers, . . . 1851.   _Royal 8vo, two volumes, half green morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Inserted is an autograph letter from Lossing.


LOSSING, BENSON JOHN.--The Home of Washington and its Associations,
historical, biographical, and pictorial. New edition, revised, with
additions.   By Benson J. Lossing.   Illustrated by numerous engravings,
chiefly from original drawings by the author, engraved by Lossing and
Barritt.   New York: W. A. Townsend, . . . 1865. _4to, green levant
morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed.   Frontispiece of Mount Vernon by
J. Duthie after G. I. Parkeyns, portrait of Washington by G. R. Hall
after Stuart, and numerous woodcuts.


LOSSING, BENSON JOHN.--A Memorial of Alexander Anderson, M.D., the First
Engraver on Wood in America.   Read before the New York Historical
Society, Oct., 5, 1870.   By Benson J. Lossing.   New York: printed for
the subscribers:   1872.   _4to, half maroon morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Bradstreet._

Illustrated with thirty-seven woodcuts and a copper-plate portrait of
Dr. Mitchill.


LOUNGER, THE.--See British Essayists.


LOVE FEAST.--The Love-Feast.   A poem.   By the Author of The Saints, a
Satire; . . . London, Printed for J. Bew, . . . M DCCLXXVIII.   _4to,
paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._


LOVE POEMS.--Musa Proterva: Love-Poems of the Restoration.   Edited by
A. H. Bullen.   [Nimmo] London: privately printed.   1889.   _4to, half
calf, gilt top, uncut edges._


LOVE POEMS.--Speculum Amantis: Love-Poems from rare song-books and
miscellanies of the seventeenth century.   Edited by A. H. Bullen.
London.   [Nimmo] Privately printed   1889.   _4to, half calf, gilt top,
uncut edges._


LOVE THE LEVELLER.--See B., G.


LOVE VERSES. Consisting of I. An Elegy to Damon. II. An Elegy, in
answer to the foregoing.   III. The Recantation. An Ode. . . . London:
Printed for T. Davies, . . . M DCC LXI. . . . _4to, paper wrappers, by
The Club Bindery._


LOWE, ROBERT W.--A Bibliographical Account of English Theatrical
Literature from the earliest times to the present day by Robert W. Lowe
   London   John C. Nimmo . . . M DCCC LXXXVIII.   _Royal 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

No. 62 of one hundred large paper copies printed.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Class Poem . . . (Cambridge Press: Metcalf,
Torry, and Ballou) . . . MDCCCXXXVIII.   _8vo, brown levant morocco,
gilt back, filleted side panel, gilt edges, by David._

First edition.   Presentation copy to "Professor Channing with the
author's respects," with the original covers.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--A Year's Life.   By James Russell Lowell . . .
Boston: C. C. Little and J. Brown.   MDCCCXLI.   _16mo, citron levant
morocco, gilt back, quintuple interlaced fillet on the sides, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.


LOWELL AND CARTER, _editors_.--The Pioneer. A Literary and Critical
Magazine.   J. R. Lowell and R. Carter, Editors and Proprietors.
January, 1843 [-March, 1843]   Vol. 1.--No. I.   [-Vol. I.--No. III.] . . .
Boston: Leland and Whiting, . . . [Philadelphia: Drew and Scammel, . . .]
   _Royal 8vo, three numbers in one volume, green levant morocco,
gilt back, side corners, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Only these three numbers of this magazine were published. Lowell's
articles were never reprinted in his Works, although they have been
issued in book form.

Four plates by J. Cheney and J. Andrews (3) after Flaxman, one by
Andrews after I. B. Wright, and one drawn and etched by D. C. Johnston.

Lowell's contributions are Introduction and Book Notices, Sonnet (p.
25), The Plays of Thomas Middleton (32-39), Song Writing (73-79), To M.
O S. (p. 90), The Street (p. 131).

Poe contributed The Tell-tale Heart (29-31), Lenore (60-61), and Notes
upon English Verse (102-112).

Hawthorne contributed The Hall of Fantasy (49-55) and The Birth-Mark
(113-119).   Mrs. Browning, The Maiden's Death (112).   Whittier, Lines
written in the Book of a Friend (79-81), and W. W. Story, Longing (29),
A Lament (100-102), and John Flaxman (132-140).


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Poems by James Russell Lowell.   Cambridge:
published by John Owen. MDCCCXLIV.   _16mo, citron levant morocco, gilt
back, quintuple interlaced fillets on the sides, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.   The dedication is dated Cambridge, December 15, 1843.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Poems.   1844.   _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Alfred Matthews._

Large and thick paper copy, with portrait by H. B. Hall after Page, and
an autograph letter, both inserted.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Poems by James Russell Lowell.   London: C. E.
Mudie, . . . 1844.   _Post 8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First London edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Conversations on some of the Old Poets.   By
James Russell Lowell. . . . Cambridge: published by John Owen.
MDCCCXLV. _8vo, white vellum side bands and corners finished with gold
ornaments, uncut edges, in a brown levant case, by Cobden-Sanderson._

First edition, with the original covers in colours.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Poems by James Russell Lowell.   Second series.
   Cambridge; published by George Nichols . . . 1848.   _16mo, citron
levant morocco, gilt back, quintuple interlaced fillets on the sides,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Meliboeus-Hipponax. The Biglow Papers, edited,
with an introduction, notes, glossary, and copious index, by Homer
Wilbur, A. M. . . . Cambridge: published by George Nichols.   1848.
_12mo, original cloth._

First edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--. . . A Fable for Critics; or . . . a glance at
a few of our literary progenies (Mrs. Malaprop's word) from the Tub of
Diogenes; that is, a series of jokes   By A Wonderful Quiz, . . . set
forth in the year '48 by G. P. Putnam, Broadway. _12mo, red levant
morocco, gilt top, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--The Vision of Sir Launfal.   By James Russell
Lowell.   Cambridge: published by George Nichols.   1848.   _12mo, brown
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Fireside Travels.   By James Russell Lowell. . . .
Boston: Ticknor and Fields. 1864.   _12mo, original cloth._

First edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Meliboeus-Hipponax. The Biglow Papers.
Second Series. . . . Boston: Ticknor and Fields.   1867.   _12mo,
original cloth._

First edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Under the Willows and other poems.   By James
Russell Lowell.   Boston: Fields, Osgood, & Co., . . . 1869.   _12mo,
original cloth, gilt top._

First edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--The Cathedral.   By James Russell Lowell.
[woodcut]   Boston: Fields, Osgood, & Co.   1870.   _12mo, original
cloth._

First edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Among my Books. By James Russell Lowell, A. M.,
. . . Boston: Fields, Osgood, & Co.   1870[-76.]   _12mo, two volumes,
brown levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--My Study Windows. By James Russell Lowell. . . .
Boston: James R. Osgood and Company, . . . 1871.   _12mo, original
cloth._

First edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Democracy and other Addresses by James Russell
Lowell.   Boston . . . Houghton, Mifflin and Company . . . 1887.
_12mo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Political Essays by James Russell Lowell.
Boston . . . Houghton, Mifflin and Company . . . 1888.   _8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Heartsease and Rue by James Russell Lowell.
Boston . . . Houghton, Mifflin and Company . . . 1888.   _12mo, boards,
gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition, with portrait.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--[Half title]   The Writings of James Russell
Lowell . . . Cambridge Printed at the Riverside Press   1890 [-1892]
_8vo, twelve volumes, half vellum, uncut edges._

No. 140 of three hundred large paper copies printed for America: with
three portraits.

The set originally contained ten volumes, dated 1890.   The additions
are "Latest Literary Essays and Addresses," dated 1891, and "The Old
English Dramatists," 1892.


LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.--Il Pesceballo opera in one act   Italian Words
by Francis James Child   English Version by James Russell Lowell
Chicago   The Caxton Club 1899.   _12mo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges_.

One of two hundred and seven copies printed on American hand-made paper.


LOWNDES, WILLIAM THOMAS.--The Bibliographer's Manual of English
Literature containing an Account of Rare, Curious, and Useful Books . . .
With Bibliographical and Critical Notices, Collations . . . and Prices
. . . By William Thomas Lowndes.   London: W. Pickering.   1834.   _8vo,
four volumes, russia, gilt edges._

Thick paper copy.


LOWNDES, WILLIAM THOMAS.--The Bibliographer's Manual of English
Literature, containing an account of rare, curious, and useful books,
published in or relating to Great Britain and Ireland, from the
Invention of Printing . . . By William Thomas Lowndes.   New edition,
revised, corrected and enlarged . . . By Henry G. Bohn   London: Bell &
Daldy . . . 1869.   _8vo, six volumes, half brown morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed.


LUCAN.--See Rowe, Nicholas.


LUeBKE, WILHELM.--History of Art, by Dr. Wilhelm Luebke . . . Translated
by F. E. Bunnett.   London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1868.   _Royal 8vo, two
volumes, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Illustrated with four hundred and three engravings.


LUeBKE, WILHELM.--Ecclesiastical Art in Germany during the middle ages
by Dr Wilhelm Luebke . . . translated from the fifth German edition with
appendix By L. A. Wheatley   Illustrated with 184 Engravings. Edinburgh
   Thomas C. Jack, . . . 1870.   _Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

LUeBKE, WILHELM.--History of Sculpture, from the earliest ages to the
present time.   By Dr. Wilhelm Luebke, . . . Translated by F. E. Bunnett.
   With numerous [377] illustrations--London: Smith, Elder and Co., . . .
1872. _4to, two volumes, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


LUCAN.--Lucan's Pharsalia; Translated into English Verse,   By Nicholas
Rowe, Esq:   London, Printed for T. Johnson   M.DCC.XX.   _Post 8vo,
half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._


LUCIAN.--Lucian's True History translated by Francis Hickes illustrated
by William Strang J. B. Clark and Aubrey Beardsley with an introduction
by Charles Whibley   London   privately printed   M DCCC XCIV. _4to,
buckram, uncut edges_.

No. 23 of fifty-four copies printed on Japanese vellum. Greek and
English text; with sixteen full-page illustrations.


LUNATIC--The Lunatick.   A Comedy.   Dedicated to the Three Ruling
B----S at the New-House in Lincolns-Inn-Fields.   London: Printed, and
Sold by B. Bragg at the Blew-Ball in Ave-Mary-Lane.   1705. Price One
Shilling.   _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A-F in fours, title on A1.


LYDEKKER, R.--See Hutchinson, Gregory, and Lydekker.


LYELL, SIR CHARLES.--A Second Visit to the United States of North
America.   By Sir Charles Lyell, . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1849.
   _Crown 8vo, two volumes, half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


LYELL, SIR CHARLES.--A Manual of Elementary Geology: or, the ancient
changes of the earth and its inhabitants as illustrated by geological
monuments.   By Sir Charles Lyell, . . . Fourth and entirely revised
edition. Illustrated with 500 woodcuts.   London: John Murray, . . .
1852.   _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


LYELL, SIR CHARLES.--Principles of Geology; or, the modern changes of
the earth and its inhabitants considered as illustrative of geology. By
Sir Charles Lyell, . . . Ninth and entirely revised edition.
Illustrated with Maps, Plates, and Woodcuts.   London: John Murray, . . .
1853.   _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


LYELL, SIR CHARLES.--The Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man
with remarks on theories of the origin of species by variation By Sir
Charles Lyell, . . . Illustrated by woodcuts London John Murray, . . .
1863. . . . _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


LYRE OF LOVE.--See Courtier, Peter L.


LYRICS.--French Lyrics Selected and annotated by George Saintsbury.
London.   Kegan Paul, Trench, & C^{o}   MDCCCLXXXII.   _8vo, citron levant
morocco, back and sides tooled in compartments with mosaic in green and
red morocco, doubled with red morocco, wide dentelle border, silk
linings, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

No. 15 of fifty large paper copies printed, with a frontispiece on India
paper.


LYTTELTON, GEORGE, LORD.--The Poetical Works of George Lord Lyttelton
with Additions: To which is prefixed an account of his Life.   London:
Printed by C. Whittingham . . . for Cadell and Davies, . . . 1801. _8vo,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Matthews._

Large paper copy.   Engraved title with portrait of Lyttelton after B.
West, and eleven plates by Burney and others, including portraits of
Lyttelton, Pitt, and Glover (India proofs), all inserted.


LYTTON, EDWARD ROBERT BULWER-LYTTON, (FIRST) LORD.--The Wanderer.   By
Owen Meredith . . . London: Chapman & Hall . . . 1859.   _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


MABERLY, J.--The Print Collector an introduction to the knowledge
necessary for forming a collection of ancient prints.   Containing
suggestions as to the mode of commencing collector, the selection of
specimens, the prices and care of prints. Also notices of the marks of
proprietorship used by collectors, remarks on the ancient and modern
practice of the art and a catalogue raisonne of books on engraving and
prints.   London Saunders and Otley, . . . MDCCCXLIV.   _4to, half
maroon morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

First edition.

Three plates of marks and numerous woodcut illustrations.


MABERLY, J.--The Print Collector.   1844.   _4to, red levant morocco,
gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Another copy, illustrated by the insertion of eighty-five selected
engravings, including examples of Goltzius, Beham, Durer, Aldegrever,
Rembrandt, Hollar, Lucas van Leyden, Bartolozzi, Raphael Morghen, etc.,
also many proof portraits of the most famous engravers, print
collectors, etc.


MABERLY, J.--The Print Collector an introduction to the knowledge
necessary for forming a collection of ancient prints.   By J. Maberly.
With an appendix containing Fielding's Treatise on the Practice of
Engraving. Edited with notes, an account of contemporary etching and
etchers, and a bibliography of engraving, by Robert Hoe, Jr.   [10
plates]   New York   Dodd Mead & Company 1880.   _4to, light brown
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by Motte._

No. 38 of fifty large paper copies printed, with several inserted
plates.


MABERLY, J.--The Print Collector.   1880.   _4to, citron levant morocco,
gilt back, side panels, corner ornaments, doubled with vellum, gilt over
uncut edges, in a blue straight-grain morocco case, by Bedford._

The only copy printed upon vellum.


MACAULAY, THOMAS BABINGTON.--Lays of Ancient Rome.   By Thomas Babington
Macaulay. London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, . . . 1842.
_Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


MACAULAY, THOMAS BABINGTON.--Lays of Ancient Rome.   By Thomas Babington
Macaulay. With illustrations, original and from the Antique, drawn on
wood by George Scharf, Jun.   London: Longman . . . 1847.   _4to, red
levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, with the original
covers bound in, by The Club Bindery._

First illustrated edition.


MACAULAY, THOMAS BABINGTON.--Critical and Historical Essays, contributed
to the Edinburgh Review, by Thomas Babington Macaulay   London: Longman
. . . 1843.   _8vo, three volumes, half blue levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


MACAULAY, THOMAS BABINGTON.--The History of England from the Accession
of James II.   By Thomas Babington Macaulay [Vol. V. Edited by his
sister, Lady Trevelyan] London . . . Longman . . . 1849-[55-61] _8vo,
five volumes, half blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._

First edition of each volume.


MACAULAY, THOMAS BABINGTON.--The History of England from the Accession
of James the Second by Lord Macaulay.   Cambridge.   Printed at the
Riverside Press 1866.   _8vo, eight volumes, half red levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

One of four copies printed on Holland paper, with three hundred and
eleven portraits inserted, including one hundred India proofs in
addition to many prints in two states, proofs before and after letters.
   The rare portrait of Samuel Pepys engraved by White is one of the
illustrations.


MACAULAY, THOMAS BABINGTON.--The History of England.   1866.   _8vo,
eight volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Drany_.

One of six special copies printed on drawing paper.   The present copy
is illustrated by the insertion of one hundred and thirty-three
portraits and views, eighty-six being proofs on India paper, many before
the letters.   Included among the portraits are the mezzotint of
Catherine of Braganza by Blooteling, India proofs before letters of the
Duchesses of Portsmouth and Cleveland by Scriven, mezzotint of James II
by Schenck, and the frontispiece, "History," by Bartolozzi.


MACAULAY, THOMAS BABINGTON.--Speeches, [Parliamentary and
Miscellaneous.] of the Right Honorable T. B. Macaulay, M. P. collected
by himself   London: Longman . . . 1854.   _8vo, half blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford_.


MACAULAY, THOMAS BABINGTON.--The Miscellaneous Writings of Lord Macaulay
   London: Longman . . . 1860.   _8vo, two volumes, half blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford_.

Portrait of Macaulay engraved by C. Cook.


MACAULAY, THOMAS BABINGTON.--See Trevelyan, George Otto.


MACKAY, CHARLES.--The Salamandrine; or, Love and Immortality.   By
Charles Mackay. . . . Third edition.   London: G. Routledge & Co. . . .
1856. _Foolscap 8vo, paper, uncut edges_.


MACKENZIE, HENRY.--The Works of Henry Mackenzie . . . Edinburgh: printed
by James Ballantyne and Co. . . . 1808.   _Crown 8vo, eight volumes,
half red levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Five portraits and four plates inserted, five being proofs on India
paper, and two proofs before letters.


MACKINTOSH, SIR JAMES.--The Miscellaneous Works of the Right Honourable
Sir James Mackintosh. . . . London: printed for Longman, Brown, Green,
and Longmans, . . . 1846.   _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges_.


MACKQUEEN, JOHN.--British Valour triumphing over French Courage: under
the Conduct of the Duke of Marlborough, Prince of the Empire.   Set
forth in some Discourses on the Victories obtained over them at
Blenheim, Ramillies, Oudenard, the Taking of Lisle, the Reduction of
Ghent and Bruges. . . . with a modest Character of his Grace.   By John
Mackqueen . . . London: Printed for J. Morphew . . . 1715.   _8vo,
contemporary red morocco, back and sides elaborately tooled._

Presentation copy from the author to Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough.


MADAN, FALCONER.--Books in Manuscript A Short Introduction to their
Study and Use.   With a Chapter on Records   By Falconer Madan, . . .
London Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., . . . M DCCC XCIII. _8vo, half
vellum, uncut edges._

No. 18 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed; with woodcut
title, and eight illustrations on Japan paper.


MAGNUSSON, EIRIKR.--See Morris, William.


MAHAN, ALFRED THAYER.--The Influence of Sea Power upon History 1660-1783
   by Captain A. T. Mahan . . . Eighth edition.   Boston   Little, Brown,
and Company   1894.   _8vo, cloth, gilt top._


MAHAN, ALFRED THAYER.--The Influence of Sea Power upon the French
Revolution and Empire 1793-1812 by Captain A. T. Mahan, . . . Fifth
edition. Boston Little, Brown, and Company   1894.   _8vo, two volumes,
cloth, gilt top._


MAHONY, FRANCIS.--The Reliques of Father Prout . . . collected and
arranged by Oliver Yorke, Esq. illustrated by Alfred Croquis, Esq . . .
[by Francis Mahony] London: James Fraser . . . 1836.   _Post 8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


MAIDMENT, JAMES, _editor_.--Scotish Ballads and Songs, historical and
traditionary.   Edited by James Maidment. [woodcut] Edinburgh.--M DCCC
LXVIII. William Paterson, . . . _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._


MAISTRE, XAVIER DE.--A Journey round my Room by Xavier de Maistre
translated from the French with a notice of the author's life   By H. A.
   London Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer.   [Riverside Press,
Cambridge] 1874.   _Post 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


MALLET (OR MALLOCH), DAVID, AND JAMES THOMSON.--Alfred: a Masque.
Acted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane, By His Majesty's Servants.
London: Printed for A. Millar, . . . M.DCC.LI.   _8vo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

Second edition: begun in collaboration with Thomson, but finished and
rewritten by Mallet.   The song "Rule Britannia" first appears in this
book, on page 64.

A2-K4 in fours, title on A2.


MALLET, DAVID.--The Works of David Mallet Esq; . . . A New Edition
corrected [vignette] London: Printed for A. Millar, and P. Vaillant . . .
MDCCLIX. _12mo, three volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Bedford._


MALLET, DAVID.--Ballads and Songs by David Mallet.   A new edition, with
Notes and Illustrations, and a memoir of the author, by Frederick
Dinsdale . . . London: Bell and Daldy . . . 1857.   _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

Eight steel plates, and fifteen other illustrations, also several pages
of music score.

Richard Grant White's copy, with autograph.


MALLOCH, DAVID.--See Mallet, David.


MALLOCK, WILLIAM HURRELL.--The New Republic; or, culture, faith, and
philosophy in an English country house. . . . London: Chatto and Windus,
. . . 1877. . . . _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


MALLOCK, WILLIAM HURRELL.--Social Equality a short study in a missing
science by W. H. Mallock . . . London Richard Bentley & Son, . . . 1882
. . . _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


MALLOCK, WILLIAM HURRELL.--The Heart of Life.   By W. H. Mallock. . . .
London: Chapman & Hall, . . . 1895. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, buckram,
uncut edges._

First edition.


MALONE, EDMOND.--An Inquiry into the Authenticity of certain
Miscellaneous Papers and Legal Instruments, published Dec. 24, M DCC
XCV. and attributed to Shakspeare, Queen Elizabeth, and Henry, Earl of
Southampton: illustrated by fac-similes of the genuine handwriting of
that nobleman, and of Her Majesty; a new fac-simile of the hand-writing
of Shakspeare, never before exhibited; and other authentick documents:
in a Letter addressed to the Right Hon. James, Earl of Charlemont, By
Edmond Malone, . . . London: Printed by H. Baldwin: . . . M DCC XCVI.
_8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, side corners, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Besides the three facsimiles, there are two inserted portraits, proofs
before letter.

Malone's own copy, with his autograph on the fly-leaf, and the note,
"Begun Jany 10. Began printing Jan. 18. Finished at the press March 28.
1796."


MANNING, ANNE.--The Maiden & Married Life of Mary Powell, Afterwards
Mistress Milton.   New York: Printed for M. W. Dodd, [by John Wilson
and Sons, Cambridge, 1866.]   _4to, half brown morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges._

No. 1 of one hundred large paper copies printed.

Originally published in _Sharpe's Magazine_, 1849.


MANNING, FRANCIS.--Poems Written at different Times on Several
Occasions, By a Gentleman who resided many Years abroad in the Two
last Reigns with a Publick Character.   London: Printed by John Watts.
MDCCLII.   _4to, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._


MANTELL, GIDEON ALGERNON.--The Wonders of Geology; or, a familiar
exposition of Geological Phenomena; being the substance of a course of
lectures delivered at Brighton.   By Gideon Algernon Mantell . . . Third
edition London:--Relfe and Fletcher . . . 1839.   _8vo, two volumes,
half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Mezzotint frontispiece by Martin, ten plates, and numerous woodcut
illustrations.


MANTELL, GIDEON ALGERNON.--The Medals of Creation; or first lessons in
Geology and the study of organic remains.   By Gideon Algernon Mantell
. . . second edition, entirely rewritten.   London: Henry G. Bohn . . .
MDCCCLIV.   _Post 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Seven plates and two hundred and seventy-five lignograph illustrations.


MANUEL, DON JUAN.--Count Lucanor: Or, the Fifty Pleasant Stories of
Patronio, Written by the Prince Don Juan Manuel, A.D. 1335-1347. First
done into English from the Spanish, by James York, Doctor of
Medicine mdccclxviii. Basil Montagu Pickering, Piccadilly in the City
of Westminster.   _Post 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._


MANUSCRIPTS.--Catalogue of an Exhibition of Illuminated and Painted
Manuscripts together with a few Early Printed Books with
Illuminations--also some Examples of Persian Manuscripts--with plates in
facsimile and an Introductory Essay   New York. The Grolier Club
1892.   _8vo, original binding, with an embroidered cover._

Three hundred and fifty copies printed.   Twenty-two facsimile plates.


MARGUERITE DE NAVARRE.--The Heptameron of Margaret, Queen of Navarre.
Translated from the French.   With a Memoir of the Author.   By Walter
K. Kelly.   London: Henry G. Bohn . . . MDCCCLV. _Post 8vo, half blue
morocco, uncut edges._

Portrait of Margaret by Winchliff.


[MARLBOROUGH, JOHN CHURCHILL, DUKE OF.]--A Compleat History of the
Wars in Flanders, Italy, Spain, Portugal, and on the Rhine.
Containing, A Particular Account of all the Glorious Victories and
Memorable Sieges, during Her Majesty's Auspicious Reign, under the
Command of the Illustrious Prince, John Duke of Marlborough, Lord
Peterborough, and the Earl of Gallway: with the Several Sea-Fights, and
Acquisitions in the Mediterranean, West-Indies, &c.   Done from the
most Authentick Accounts, and Original Letters of several
Ministers of State at Home and Abroad.   London   Printed, and Sold by
J. How, . . . 1707.   _12mo, sprinkled calf, citron edges._

Equestrian portrait of the Duke of Marlborough.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--The Naval Officer; or, scenes and adventures in the
life of Frank Mildmay. . . . London: Henry Colburn, . . . 1829.   _Post
8vo, three volumes, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--The King's Own   By the author of "The Naval
Officer."   London: Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley . . . 1830.
_8vo, three volumes, red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Newton Forster; or, the merchant service.   By the
author of "The King's Own." London: James Cochrane and Co., . . . 1832.
   _8vo, three volumes, red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Jacob Faithful   by the author of "Peter Simple,"
&c.   London: Saunders and Otley, . . . 1834.   _8vo, three volumes,
blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--The Pacha of Many Tales   by the author of "Peter
Simple" &c London Saunders and Otley, . . . 1835.   _8vo, three volumes,
red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Japhet in Search of a Father.   By the author of
"Peter Simple," &c   London Saunders and Otley, . . . 1836.   _8vo,
three volumes, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Mr. Midshipman   Easy by the author of "Japhet, in
Search of a Father," &c London   Saunders and Otley, . . . 1836.   _8vo,
three volumes, dark brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Peter Simple.   By the author of "Newton Foster,"
"The King's Own," &c. . . . Illustrated Edition.   London Saunders and
Otley, . . . 1837.   _Post 8vo, three volumes, green levant morocco,
gilt back, side corners, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original blue
cloth covers bound in, by The Club Bindery._

Twelve plates drawn and etched by R. W. Buss.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Snarleyow or the Dog Fiend.   By the author of
"Peter Simple," &c   London: Henry Colburn, . . . 1837.   _8vo, three
volumes, dark green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--The Phantom Ship.   By Capt. Marryat, R. N., . . .
London: Henry Colburn, . . . 1839.   _Post 8vo, three volumes, red
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--A Diary in America, with remarks on its
institutions. By Captain Marryat, . . . London: printed for Longman, . . .
1839.   _Post 8vo, six volumes, half green levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition of both series, each in three volumes, with a large folded
map.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Olla Podrida.   By the author of "Peter Simple," &.
&c.   London: Longman . . . 1840.   _8vo, three volumes, blue morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Poor Jack. by Captain Marryat, C. B.   With
illustrations by Clarkson Stanfield, R. A.   London: Longman, Orme,
Brown, Green, and Longmans, . . . 1840.   _8vo, blue levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.   Thirty-six full-page wood engravings, and eleven
vignettes by Branston, Vizetelly, and Landells, after Stanfield.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Joseph Rushbrook; or, The Poacher.   By the author
of Peter Simple.   London: Longman, . . . 1841.   _8vo, three volumes,
red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Masterman Ready; or, the Wreck of the Pacific.
Written for young people, [his own children]   By Captain Marryat.
London: Longman . . . 1841.   _Foolscap 8vo, three volumes, green levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original covers inserted, by
Riviere._

First edition, with ninety-three woodcut illustrations.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Percival Keene.   By Capt. Marryat.   London.
Henry Colburn . . . 1842. _8vo, three volumes, brown morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Narrative of the Travels and Adventures of Monsieur
Violet, in California, Sonora, & Western Texas.   Written by Capt.
Marryat, C. B. . . . London: Longman, Brown, &c . . . 1843.   _Post 8vo,
three volumes, red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--The Pirate, and the Three Cutters.   By Captain
Marryat, R. N.   Illustrated with Twenty splendid Engravings from
drawings by Clarkson Stanfield, . . . A. Fullarton and Co. . . . London
. . . M DCCC XLV.   _8vo, red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--The Mission: or, Scenes in Africa.   Written for
young people.   By Captain Marryat. . . . London: Longman, Brown, Green,
& Longmans, . . . 1845.   _Post 8vo, two volumes, red morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.   Frontispieces and a map.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--The Privateer's-Man One Hundred Years ago.   By
Captain Marryat, R. N. London: Longman . . . 1846.   _Post 8vo, two
volumes, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--The Children of the New Forest   by Capt. Marryat,
R. N. . . . London: H. Hurst, . . . [n. d.]   _Post 8vo, two volumes,
red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Eight steel plates after Frank Marryat.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--The Little Savage.   By Captain Marryat, R. N. . . .
First Edition.   London: H. Hurst, . . . 1848.   _Post 8vo, two
volumes, red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Eight full-page woodcuts.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--Valerie, an autobiography. By Captain Marryat, R.
N. . . . London: Henry Colburn, . . . 1849. . . . _Post 8vo, two
volumes, red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


MARRYAT, FREDERICK.--See Howard, Edward.


MARRYAT, JOSEPH.--Collections towards a history of Pottery and
Porcelain, in the 15th, 16th. and 18th. centuries: with a description of
the manufacture, a glossary, and a list of monograms.   By Joseph
Marryat. Illustrated with [12] coloured plates and [118] woodcuts.
London: John Murray, . . . 1850.   _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


MARRYAT, JOSEPH.--Collections towards a history of Pottery and
Porcelain.   1850.   _4to, half red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


MARRYAT, JOSEPH.--A History of Pottery and Porcelain, Mediaeval and
Modern.   By Joseph Marryat. Third edition, revised and augmented, with
coloured plates [6] and numerous woodcuts [254] London: John Murray . . .
1868.   _8vo, green levant morocco, back and sides tooled in the
manner of Roger Payne, gilt edges, by Bedford._


MARTIALIS, MARCUS VALERIUS.--The Epigrams of Martial.   Translated into
English prose.   Each accompanied by one or more verse translations,
from the works of English poets, and various other sources.   London:
Henry G. Bohn . . . MDCCCLX.   _Post 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by Stamper._


MARTIALIS, MARCUS VALERIUS.--Ex otio Negotium. or, Martiall his Epigrams
translated . . . By R. Fletcher.   London: printed for distribution
amongst private subscribers only: MDCCCXCIII.   _8vo, cloth, gilt back
and sides, gilt top, uncut edges_.

One hundred and five copies printed, with portrait of Martial.


MARTIN, HENRI.--Martin's History of France. The Age of Louis XIV.   By
Henri Martin.   Translated from the fourth Paris edition   By Mary L.
Booth. . . . Boston: Walker, Wise, and Company.   1865.   _Royal 8vo,
two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

One of seventy-five large paper copies printed, with two portraits.


MARTIN, HENRI.--Martin's History of France. The Decline of the French
Monarchy.   By Henri Martin. Translated from the fourth Paris edition,
By Mary L. Booth. . . . Boston: Walker, Fuller, and Company. 1866.
_Imperial 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

One of seventy-five large paper copies printed, with portrait and map.


MARTIN, JOHN.--A Bibliographical Catalogue of Books, Privately Printed;
including those of the Bannatyne, Maitland and Roxburghe Clubs, and of
the Private Presses at Darlington, Auchinleck, Lee Priory, Newcastle,
Middle Hill, and Strawberry Hill.   By John Martin . . . London: J. and
A. Arch . . . M.DCCC.XXXIV.   _Imperial 8vo, two volumes, purple
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Wickwar._

Large paper copy with two frontispieces, one coloured.


MARTIN, JOHN, _editor_.--The Seven Ages of Shakspeare. [vignette]
London: John Van Voorst, . . . M D CCC XL.   _4to, cloth, gilt edges._

Nine full-page plates, one vignette, and two other illustrations, after
Mulready, Constable, Wilkie, Landseer, and others.


MASKELL, WILLIAM.--The Ancient Liturgy of the Church of England
according to the uses of Sarum Bangor York & Hereford and the modern
Roman Liturgy arranged in parallel columns by William Maskell . . .
London   William Pickering   1844.   _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


MASKELL, WILLIAM.--A History of the Martin Marprelate Controversy in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by the Rev. William Maskell . . . London
William Pickering   1845.   _8vo, calf, gilt back, by Riviere._

Large paper copy.


MASON, GEORGE C.--The Life and Works of Gilbert Stuart   By George C.
Mason   With Selections from Stuart's Portraits   Reproduced on Steel
and by Photogravure [vignette portrait]   New York   Charles Scribner's
Sons   1879.   _4to, cloth, uncut edges._

Fourteen plates.


MASON, JOHN.--A Brief History of the Pequot War: Especially Of the
memorable Taking of their Fort at Mistick in Connecticut In 1637:
Written by Major John Mason, A principal Actor therein, as then chief
Captain and Commander of Connecticut Forces.   With an Introduction and
some Explanatory Notes   By the Reverend Mr. Thomas Prince . . . Boston:
Printed & Sold by S. Kneeland & T. Green . . . 1736.   _4to, brown
levant morocco, black ornament on the sides, uncut edges, by
Zaehnsdorf._


MASSACHUSETTS BAY.--A brief Account of the State of the Province of the
Massachusetts-Bay in New-England, Civil and Ecclesiastical.   By a Lover
of his Country.   Boston: Printed by T. Crump, for Gillam Phillips, . . .
1717.   _Small 4to (four leaves), brown levant morocco, filleted back
and sides, rough edges, by Zaehnsdorf._


MASUCCIO DI SALERNO.--The Novellino of Masuccio   now first translated
into English by W. G. Waters   illustrated by E. R. Hughes, . . .
London: Lawrence and Bullen . . . M DCCC XCV.   _Imperial 8vo, two
volumes, half vellum, uncut edges._

No. 104 of two hundred and ten copies printed on Japanese vellum, with
twenty plates in bistre.


MATHEWS, ANNE JACKSON.--Memoirs of Charles Mathews, Comedian.   By Mrs.
Mathews.   [vignette] Second edition. . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . .
1839.   _8vo, four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Seventeen portraits and scenes, the former including two of Mathews by
W. Greatbatch after J. Lonsdale, J. Brown after Masquerier; the latter,
for the most tinted, after drawings by Aug. Hervieu.


MATHIAS, THOMAS JAMES.--The Pursuits of Literature, a satirical poem in
four dialogues, with notes. To which are added an appendix; the
citations translated; and a complete index.   The sixteenth edition. . . .
London: printed for Becket and Porter, . . . by W. Bulmer and Co. . . .
1812.   _4to, two volumes, green straight-grain morocco, gilt back,
side corners, gilt edges, by C. Smith._

The first dialogue was first published in 1794, the second and third in
1796, and the fourth in 1797.

The present copy is illustrated by the insertion of over two hundred
selected portraits, including many mezzotints and plates printed in
colours. Some are private plates and many are proofs.


MATTHEWS, BRANDER.--Bookbindings Old and New   Notes of a Book-Lover
With an Account of the Grolier Club of New York   By Brander Matthews
Illustrated   New York.   Macmillan and Co. . . . M dcccxcv . . . _12mo,
dark green velvet, back and side borders embroidered in gold and colours
to simulate jewels, olive silk linings, gilt over uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

No. 19 of one hundred and fifty copies printed on Japanese vellum.


MAYHEW, AUGUSTUS AND HORACE.--The Image of his Father; or, one boy is
more trouble than a dozen girls   being a tale of a "young monkey."   By
the Brothers Mayhew.   Illustrated by "Phiz." [H. K. Browne] London: H.
Hurst, . . . 1848. _Post 8vo, brown straight-grain morocco, gilt
fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original green cloth and gilt
covers bound in, by The Club Bindery._

First edition: with eleven plates.


MAYHEW, AUGUSTUS.--Paved with Gold or the Romance and Reality of the
London Streets.   An Un-fashionable Novel.   By Augustus Mayhew (one of
the brothers Mayhew).   With illustrations by H. K. Browne. London:
Chapman and Hall, . . . 1858.   _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition: with engraved title-page and twenty-six other plates.


MAYHEW AND BINNY.--The Criminal Prisons of London and Scenes of Prison
Life.   By Henry Mayhew, . . . and John Binny, . . . With numerous
illustrations from photographs. London: Griffin, Bohn, and Company, . . .
M D CCC LXII. _8vo, half brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top._

Folded frontispiece, fifty-two full-page woodcuts, and numerous
illustrations in the text.


MAYHEW, HENRY.--London Labour and the London Poor: the condition and
earnings of those that will work, cannot work, and will not work. By
Henry Mayhew. . . . London: Charles Griffin and Company, . . . [n. d.]
_8vo, three volumes, half brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top._


MAYHEW, HENRY.--London Labour and the London Poor; a Cyclopaedia of the
condition and earnings of

  Those that will work,
  Those that cannot work, and
  Those that will not work.

  By Henry Mayhew. Those that will not work.

         Comprising,
  Prostitutes. | Swindlers.
  Thieves.     | Beggars

By several contributors. With introductory essay on the agencies at
present in operation in the metropolis for the suppression of vice and
crime. By the Rev. William Tuckniss, . . . With [16] illustrations, [and
15 maps] London: Griffin, Bohn, and Company, . . . 1862. _8vo, half
brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top._


MCCARTHY AND PENNELL.--Charing Cross to St. Paul's   Notes by Justin
McCarthy, M. P. and [12] Plates and Vignettes from Drawings by Joseph
Pennell London: Seeley and Co. . . . 1891. _Folio, half red morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 24 of one hundred large paper copies printed.


McCREERY, JOHN.--The Press, a poem. Published as a specimen of
typography. By John M^{c}Creery. Liverpool: printed by J. M^{c}Creery,
Houghton-Street. and sold by Cadell and Davies, Strand, London. 1803.
[Part the second--London: printed by J. M^{c}Creery . . . 1827.] _4to,
red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt over marbled edges._

In addition to the cuts printed with this volume, one hundred and
twenty-nine plates have been added, including many fine proofs and rare
copper-plate engravings. These additions illustrate the various forms of
printing and engraving, and are interspersed with portraits of printers,
famous collectors, and writers.


McMASTER, JOHN BACH.--Benjamin Franklin as a Man of Letters. By John
Bach McMaster, . . . Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Company. . . . 1887.
_12mo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition: with portrait by Albert Rosenthal after C. W. Peale.


M^{c}VICKAR, HARRY WHITNEY.--The Evolution of Woman [cut]   by Harry
Whitney M^{c}.Vickar   New York   Harper & Brothers . . . 1896. _Square
8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Twenty-two full-page coloured plates by the author, and twenty-two
illustrations in the text.

Presentation copy, with autograph letter inserted.


MEERMAN, GERARD.--See Middleton and Meerman.


MEINHOLD, WILLIAM.--Sidonia the Sorceress by William Meinhold translated
by Francesca Speranza Lady Wilde. [Kelmscott Press, William Morris,
1893] _Small folio, vellum wrappers, uncut edges._

Printed upon vellum.


MELMOTH, WILLIAM.--Of Active and Retired Life, an Epistle . . . London,
Printed for T. Cooper . . . MDCCXXXV. _Folio, red levant morocco, by The
Club Bindery. Bound with ten other works._

First edition. Sixteen pages, including title.


MEMES, JOHN S.--Memoirs of Antonio Canova, with a critical analysis of
his works, and an historical view of Modern Sculpture . . . By J. S.
Memes, . . . Edinburgh: printed for Archibald Constable & Co., . . .
1825. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

Portrait and three plates of medals, etc.


MEMOIRS of the Little Man and the Little Maid: with some interesting
particulars of their lives. Never before published. London: [Printed by
C. Squire] published by B. Tabart & Co. . . . 1808. _Small 4to, blue
levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Twelve aquatints dated May, 1807.

Title, six leaves of musical score, text: B-D in twos, and a final leaf
of advertisement.


MENDOZA AND ALEMAN.--. . . The Life and Adventures of Lazarillo de
Tormes translated from the Spanish of Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza By
Thomas Roscoe The Life and Adventures of Guzman D'Alfarache or The
Spanish Rogue By Mateo Aleman   from the French edition of Le Sage By
John Henry Brady With Eight Original Etchings by R. de Los Rios . . .
London   J. C. Nimmo and Bain . . . 1881. _8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

No. 41 of fifty large paper copies printed, with proof etchings on Japan
paper.


MENZEL, WOLFGANG.--German Literature by Wolfgang Menzel. Translated from
the German, with notes by Thomas Gordon. Oxford: D. A. Talboys . . .
MDCCCXL. _Crown 8vo, four volumes, russia, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Bedford._


"MERCURIUS RUSTICUS."--See Dibdin, T. F.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Poems: by George Meredith.   London: John W. Parker
and Son, . . . [1851] _Post 8vo, half brown levant morocco, uncut edges,
by Carayon._

First edition, with the slip of "Errata" at the end.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--The Shaving of Shagpat. An Arabian Entertainment.
By George Meredith. London:   Chapman and Hall, . . . 1856. _12mo, half
brown levant morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--The Shaving of Shagpat an Arabian Entertainment. By
George Meredith. A new edition. London:   Chapman and Hall, . . . 1865.
_Crown 8vo, half maroon levant morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

This edition has a frontispiece engraved on steel by J. Saddler after a
design by F. Sandys.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--The Ordeal of Richard Feverel.   A History of Father
and Son. By George Meredith.   London:   Chapman and Hall . . . 1859.
_Crown 8vo, three volumes, half orange levant morocco, uncut edges, by
Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Evan Harrington. By George Meredith. London:
Bradbury & Evans . . . 1861. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, half red levant
morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Modern Love and Poems of the English Roadside, with
Poems and Ballads. By George Meredith   London:   Chapman and Hall . . .
1862. _Post 8vo, half brown levant morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Emilia in England. By George Meredith. London:
Chapman & Hall, . . . 1864. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, half olive levant
morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Rhoda Fleming. A Story. By George Meredith. London:
Tinsley Brothers, . . . 1865. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, half red levant
morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Vittoria by George Meredith.   London: Chapman &
Hall, . . . MDCCCLXVII. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, half citron levant
morocco, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--The Adventures of Harry Richmond.   By George
Meredith   London:   Smith, Elder & Co., . . . 1871. _Crown 8vo, three
volumes, half green levant morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Beauchamp's Career. By George Meredith. London:
Chapman and Hall, . . . 1876. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, half green
levant morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--The Egoist   a comedy in narrative   by George
Meredith. London Kegan Paul & Co., . . . 1879. _Crown 8vo, three
volumes, half brown levant morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--The Tragic Comedians. A Study in a well-known Story.
(enlarged from the Fortnightly Review.) By George Meredith. London:
Chapman and Hall, . . . 1880. _Post 8vo, two volumes, half brown levant
morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Poems and Lyrics of the Joys of Earth   by George
Meredith. London Macmillan and Co. 1883. _Post 8vo, half brown levant
morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Diana of the Crossways A Novel By George Meredith.
Considerably enlarged from "The Fortnightly Review." London: Chapman and
Hall . . . 1885. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, half blue levant morocco,
uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Ballads and Poems of Tragic Life by George Meredith.
London Macmillan and Co. . . . 1887. _Post 8vo, half brown levant
morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--A Reading of Earth by George Meredith. London
Macmillan and Co . . . 1888. _Post 8vo, cloth, half brown levant
morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--One of our Conquerors. By George Meredith.   London:
Chapman and Hall, . . . 1891. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, half brown
levant morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Poems   The Empty Purse with Odes to the Comic Spirit
to Youth in Memory and Verses. By George Meredith. London   Macmillan
and Co. 1892. _Post 8vo, half maroon levant morocco, uncut edges, by
Carayon._


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Jump to Glory Jane. By George Meredith. Edited and
arranged by Harry Quilter. With forty-four designs invented, drawn, and
written by Lawrence Housman. Swan, Sonnenschein & Co. . . . 1892. _Crown
8vo, original vellum boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition. One thousand copies printed.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--The Tale of Chloe--The House on the Beach--The Case
of General Ople and Lady Camper. By George Meredith   London   Ward,
Lock & Bowden, . . . 1894. _Crown 8vo, half citron levant morocco, uncut
edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


MEREDITH, GEORGE--The Tale of Chloe--1894. _8vo, half vellum, uncut
edges._

No. 30 of two hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with
portrait and view on Japan paper.


MEREDITH, GEORGE.--Lord Ormont and his Aminta.   A Novel. By George
Meredith. London: Chapman and Hall, . . . 1894. _Crown 8vo, three
volumes, half blue levant morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition.


"MEREDITH, OWEN."--See Lytton, Lord.


[MERIMEE, PROSPER.]--An Author's Love being the unpublished letters of
Prosper Merimee's 'Inconnue' London   Macmillan and Co. . . . 1889 . . .
_Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


MERRITT, HENRY.--Henry Merritt   Art Criticism and Romance,   with
Recollections, and 23 etchings by Anna Lea Merritt. London   C. Kegan
Paul & Co . . . 1879. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


MERRYWEATHER, F. SOMNER.--Glimmerings in the Dark; or Lights and Shadows
of The Olden Time. By F. Somner Merryweather, . . . London: Simpkin,
Marshall, & Co., . . . M D CCCL.   _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


METEYARD, ELIZA.--The Life of Josiah Wedgwood from his private
correspondence and family papers in the possession of Joseph Mayer,
Esq., F.S.A. F. Wedgwood, Esq. C. Darwin, Esq., M.A., F.R.S. Miss
Wedgwood and other original sources with An Introductory Sketch of the
Art of Pottery in England by Eliza Meteyard with numerous illustrations
. . . London Hurst and Blackett, . . . 1865 [-1866]   _8vo, two volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

The illustrations consist of two steel portraits, two coloured plates,
and two hundred and eighty-two woodcuts.


METEYARD, ELIZA.--Memorials of Wedgwood. A selection from his fine art
works in plaques, medallions, figures, and other ornamental objects.
With an introduction, and descriptions of the objects delineated, by
Eliza Meteyard, . . . [portrait]   London: George Bell and Sons, . . .
1874. _4to, cloth, gilt edges._

Twenty-eight plates.


MEYRICK, SAMUEL RUSH.--A Critical Inquiry into Antient Armour, as it
existed in Europe, but particularly in England, from the Norman Conquest
to the reign of King Charles II, with a glossary of military terms of
the Middle Ages. . . . By Samuel Rush Meyrick; London: printed by G.
Schulze, . . . for Robert Jennings,--M DCCC XXIV.   _Folio, three
volumes, half blue morocco, uncut edges._

Engraved titles and eighty plates, for the most part coloured.


MICHAUX, F. ANDREW.--The North American Sylva, or a Description of the
Forest Trees of the United States, Canada and Nova Scotia, Considered
particularly with respect to their use in the Arts, and their
introduction into Commerce; to which is added a description of the most
useful of the European forest trees. Illustrated by 156 coloured
engravings. Translated from the French of F. Andrew Michaux, . . .
Paris, printed by C. D'Hautel.   1819.   _Royal 8vo, two volumes, green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Translated by Augustus L. Hillhouse.


MICHAUX, F. ANDREW.--See Nuttall, Thomas.


MICHEL, EMILE.--Rembrandt His Life, his Work, and his Time by Emile
Michel   from the French by Florence Simmonds edited by Frederick
Wedmore   With Sixty-seven Full-page Plates   And Two Hundred and Fifty
Text Illustrations . . . London   William Heinemann . . . M DCCC XCIV.
_4to, two volumes, half cloth, uncut edges._

No. 52 of two hundred large Japan paper copies printed.


MIDDLETON, CHARLES HENRY.--A Descriptive Catalogue of the Etched Work of
Rembrandt Van Rhyn by Charles Henry Middleton.   [with 12 plates] London
John Murray, . . . 1878.   _Royal 8vo, half morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges._


MIDDLETON, CHARLES S.--Shelley and his Writings. By Charles S.
Middleton.   London: Thomas Cautley Newby . . . 1858. _12mo, two
volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First edition, with a facsimile letter.


MIDDLETON, CONYERS, AND GERARD MEERMAN.--The Origin of Printing.   In
Two Essays: I. The Substance of Dr. Middleton's Dissertation on the
Origin of Printing in England.   II. Mr. Meerman's Account of the
Invention of the Art at Harleim, and its Progress to Mentz.   With
Occasional Remarks and an Appendix. The Second edition: with
Improvements. London: Printed for W. Bowyer and J. Nichols. . . . M
DCCLXXVI. _8vo, half blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Allo._

An argument in favour of Lawrence Koster.


MIDDLETON, J. HENRY.--Illuminated Manuscripts in Classical and Mediaeval
Times, their art and their technique   by J. Henry Middleton, . . .
Cambridge: at the University Press: 1892 . . . _Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt
top._

Woodcut frontispiece and fifty-five other illustrations.


MILLER, JAMES.--An Hospital for Fools.   A dramatic fable.   As it is
Acted at the Theatre-Royal, By His Majesty's Servants.   To which is
added the Songs with their Basses and Symphonies, and Transposed
for the Flute.   The Musick by Mr. Arne.   Sung by Mrs. Clive. [Line
from Horace]   London: Printed for J. Watts . . . M DCC XXXIX. . . .
_8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


MILLER, JAMES.--See Popeiana, 1732-1741. "Are these Things so?" 1740 and
"The Great Man's Answer" &c, 1740.


MILLER, JOE.--See Jest Books.


MILLS, CHARLES.--An History of Muhammedanism: comprising the Life and
Character of the Arabian Prophet, and succinct accounts of the Empires
founded by the Muhammeden Arms: an inquiry into the Theology, Laws,
Literature, and Usages of the Muselmans, and a view of the present state
and extent of the Muhammedan Religion.   By Charles Mills.   The Second
Edition, revised and augmented   London: printed for Black . . . 1818.
_8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


MILLS, CHARLES.--The Travels of Theodore Ducas, in Various Countries in
Europe, and the Revival of Letters and Art. Edited by Charles Mills.
London: printed for Longman . . . 1822. _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

In the second volume, pages 201-220, is an account of the Aldine Press,
and libraries and printers on pages 39-44 of the same volume.   Although
a "voyage imaginaire," the details are generally "de facto."


MILLS, CHARLES.--The History of Chivalry or Knighthood and its Times.
By Charles Mills Esq^{r}. . . . London: Printed for Longman . . .
M.DCCC.XXVI. _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Bedford._

Engraved title-pages with vignettes by A. Le Petit after R. W. Sievier.


MILLS, CHARLES.--The History of the Crusades, for the Recovery and
Possession of the Holy Land. By Charles Mills . . . with a Memoir of the
Author. London: printed for Longman . . . 1828. _8vo, two volumes, calf
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Portrait of the author, frontispiece, and map.


MILMAN, HENRY HART.--The Poetical Works of the Rev: H. H. Milman.
London: John Murray . . . MDCCCXXXIX. _Post 8vo, three volumes, green
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Portrait by E. Finden after F. Cruikshank and engraved title-pages.


MILNES, RICHARD MONCKTON.--See Houghton, Lord.


MINNESINGERS.--Lays of the Minnesingers or German Troubadours of the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries: illustrated by specimens of the
cotemporary lyric poetry of Provence and other parts of Europe: with
historical and critical notices, and engravings [12] from the MS. of the
Minnesingers in the King's Library at Paris, and from other sources.
London: printed for Longman . . . 1825. _Crown 8vo, blue morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._


MINSTRELSY.--The Minstrelsy of the English Border.   Being a Collection
of Ballads, ancient, remodelled, and original, founded on well known
Border Legends.   With illustrative Notes by Frederick Sheldon. London:
Longman, Green and Longmans . . . 1847. _Square 8vo, blue levant
morocco, gilt panels, gilt top, uncut edges._

Illustrated by the insertion of sixty-four views and portraits,
including many India proofs as head and tail pieces.


MIRROR, THE.--See British Essayists.


MITFORD, MARY RUSSELL.--Our Village by Mary Russell Mitford with an
Introduction by Anne Thackeray Ritchie and one hundred illustrations by
Hugh Thomson. London   Macmillan and Co . . . 1893. _Royal 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

One of four hundred and seventy large paper copies printed.


MOCK ELECTION.--A Description of the Mock Election at Garrat, On the
Seventh of this Month. Wherein is given Some Historical Account of its
first Rise, the various Cavalcades of the different Candidates, the
Speeches they made upon the Hustings, the whimsical Oath of
Qualification, and An Authentic Copy of their several droll Printed
Addresses.   Collected, for the Amusement of a Country Friend, By a
Person on the Spot.   London; Printed for W. Bingley, . . . 1768. _8vo,
brown levant morocco.   Bound at the end of GOLDSMITH'S "Mystery
Revealed," 1762._


MOLIERE, JEAN BAPTISTE POQUELIN.--Monsieur de Pourceaugnac, or, Squire
Trelooby.   Acted at the Subscription Musick at the Theatre Royal in
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. March 30. 1704.   By Select Comedians from both
Houses. Done into English from a Comedy of Moliere's, which was made
and perform'd at Chambord for the Diversion of the French King, in the
Year 1679. [Line in Latin] London, Printed for William Davis, at the
Black Bull against the Royal Exchange, and Bernard Lintott, at the
Middle-Temple Gate in Fleetstreet.   1704. Price 1s. 6d. _4to, blue
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

A1-A4, a1-a2, and B-H in fours, half-title on A1, title on A2, Preface
dated April 19, 1704, and Prologue by Dr. Garth.

A play called "The Cornish Squire" was adapted from the same work of
Moliere, by Vanbrugh, Congreve, and Walsh.


MOLIERE, JEAN BAPTISTE POQUELIN.--The Dramatic Works of Moliere rendered
into English   By Henri Van Laun with a prefatory memoir, introductory
notices, appendices and notes.   Edinburgh:   William Paterson
MDCCCLXXV. _Royal 8vo, six volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Large paper copy, with numerous etchings by Lalauze in three states; in
addition are plates by Boucher, Fragonard, etc.


MOLLOY, J. FITZGERALD.--The Life and Adventures of Peg Woffington with
pictures of the period in which she lived.   By J. Fitzgerald Molloy . . .
[portrait] London: Hurst and Blackett, . . . 1884. . . . _Crown 8vo,
two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


MONCRIEFF, W. THOMAS.--Poems, by W. T. Moncrieff.   printed (for private
distribution only) at the author's private press, Saville House,
Lambeth. MDCCCXXIX. _Small 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


MONSTER.--The Monster: or, The World turn'd Topsy Turvy.   A Satyr. . . .
London, Printed: And Sold by B. Bragg . . . 1705. (Price 6d.) _4to,
figured silk boards, uncut edges._


MONTAGU, BASIL.--Essays and Selections by Basil Montagu   London William
Pickering   1837. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


MONTAGU, LADY MARY WORTLEY.--The Works of the Right Honourable Lady Mary
Wortley Montagu, including her correspondence, poems, and essays.
Published, by permission, from her genuine papers.   The sixth edition
. . . . London: printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, . . .
&c 1817. _Crown 8vo, five volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

Portrait by Caroline Watson after Richardson.


MONTAGU, LADY MARY WORTLEY.--The Letters and Works of Lady Mary Wortley
Montagu. Edited by her great grandson Lord Wharncliffe . . . London:
Richard Bentley . . . 1837 _8vo, three volumes, half red morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Three portraits engraved by Greatbatch.


MONTAGU, LADY MARY WORTLEY.--The Letters and Works of Lady Mary Wortley
Montagu. Edited by her great-grandson Lord Wharncliffe. Third Edition,
with additions and corrections derived from the Original Manuscripts,
illustrative notes, and a new Memoir By W. Moy Thomas.   London: Henry
G. Bohn . . . MDCCCLXI. _8vo, two volumes, half red morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges._

Six portraits by Greatbatch and others.


MONTAGU, LADY MARY WORTLEY.--The Letters and Works of Lady Mary Wortley
Montagu. Edited by her great-grandson Lord Wharncliffe.   Third
edition, with additions and corrections derived from the original
manuscripts, illustrative notes, and a new memoir. By W. Moy Thomas.
London: Henry G. Bohn, . . . MDCCCLXVI. _8vo, two volumes, half brown
levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Six portraits.


MONTAIGNE, MICHAEL DE.--Works of Michael de Montaigne comprising his
Essays, Journey into Italy, and Letters, with Notes from all the
Commentators, Biographical and Bibliographical Notices, etc.   By W.
Hazlitt.   A new and carefully revised edition, edited by O. W. Wight.
Cambridge: Riverside Press . . . 1864. _8vo, four volumes, half morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, seventy-five printed, with proof impression of the
portrait on India paper.


MONTGOMERY, GEORGE W.--See Longfellow, H. W.   Novelas Epanolas.


MONTGOMERY, JAMES.--The Poetical Works of James Montgomery.   With a
Life.   Boston: Little, Brown, and Company.   1865. _12mo, five volumes,
half green cloth, uncut edges._

No. 13 of one hundred copies printed on large paper, with portrait.


MOORE AND BROOKE.--Fables for the Female Sex. [vignette] [by Edward
Moore and Henry Brooke] London: Printed for R. Francklin, . . .
MDCCXLIV. _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.   Seventeen plates and a vignette, by Grignion, Mosley,
and Ravenet after the designs of Hayman.


MOORE AND BROOKE.--Fables for the Female Sex.   1744. _8vo, red morocco,
gilt back, the sides decorated with a triumphal arch in gold and mosaic,
with figures of Fame, wreaths of laurel, dove with olive branch, and
falcons, gilt edges._

Thick paper copy, presented to Mrs. David Garrick by the author, with
inscription and four verses signed.   David Garrick's bookplate is
affixed to the inside cover.


MOORE AND BROOKE.--Moore's Fables for The Female Sex.   Embellished with
Engravings [vignette] London.   Published by T. Heptinstall . . . H. D.
Symonds &c . . . (Printed by C. Whittingham)   1799. _Post 8vo, half
brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Engraved title and five plates after White, besides three inserted
engravings, two by C. Warren after R. Corbould, and one by Bartolozzi
after Rebecca.


MOORE, FRANCIS.--A Voyage to Georgia.   Begun in the Year 1735.
Containing, An Account of the Settling the Town of Frederica, in the
Southern Part of the Province; and a Description of the Soil, Air,
Birds, Beasts, Trees, Rivers, Islands, &c. With The Rules and Orders
made by the Honourable the Trustees for that Settlement; including the
Allowances of Provisions, Cloathing, and other Necessaries to the
Families and Servants which went thither.   Also A Description of the
Town and County of Savannah, in the Northern Part of the Province; the
Manner of dividing and granting the Lands, and the Improvements there:
With an Account of the Air, Soil, Rivers, and Islands in that Part. By
Francis Moore, . . . London: Printed for Jacob Robinson . . . 1744.
_8vo, red morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges._


MOORE, THOMAS.--Lalla Rookh, An Oriental Romance.   By Thomas Moore.
London: printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, [by A.
Strahan and T. Davison] 1817. _4to, green straight-grain morocco, gilt
back, side borders of interlaced fillets, gilt and blind-tooled
compartments, centre ornament of a harp surrounded by a wreath, wide
inside borders, gauffred gilt edges, by Dawson and Lewis._

Engraved title-page and five other plates by Heath after Westall.
Dedication to Samuel Rogers, dated May 19, 1817.

Six editions were printed in 1817.


MOORE, THOMAS.--Lalla Rookh. 1817. _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy with numerous added plates.


MOORE, THOMAS.--Lalla Rookh, an Oriental Romance.   By Thomas Moore.
New edition.   Illustrated with [13] engravings from drawings by eminent
artists.   London: printed for Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, . . .
1846. _Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


MOORE, THOMAS.--Lalla Rookh: an Oriental Romance.   By Thomas Moore.
With sixty-nine illustrations from original drawings by John Tenniel,
engraved on wood by the Brothers Dalziel; and five ornamental pages of
Persian design by T. Sulman Jun.   engraved on wood by H. N. Woods. New
Edition. London: Longmans &c 1872. _4to, green levant morocco, gilt back
and sides, with centre ornament of Persian design, gilt edges, by
Riviere._


MOORE, THOMAS.--Lalla Rookh an oriental romance by Thomas Moore   Boston
Estes and Lauriat [University Press]   1885. _Imperial 8vo, original
paper wrappers, uncut edges, in a satin portfolio, with ties._

No. 224 of five hundred copies printed on Imperial Japanese paper.   One
hundred and forty-three illustrations after J. Wells Champney, Robert
Blum, Kenyon Cox, Walter Satterlee, F. T. Merrill, W. H. Low, F. H.
Allen, and others.


MOORE, THOMAS.--The Loves of the Angels, A Poem.   By Thomas Moore. . . .
With embellishments. Paris: printed for Ant.-Aug. Renouard, and Jules
Didot, Senior. M D C C C X X I I I. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt
back, side borders, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

One of two copies printed upon vellum: with three illustrations. Five
editions were published in 1823.


MOORE, THOMAS.--Memoirs of the Life of the Right Honourable Richard
Brinsley Sheridan.   By Thomas Moore. London: printed for Longman, . . .
1825. _4to, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First edition, with mezzotint portrait of Sheridan by C. Turner after
Reynolds, and a facsimile. Nearly one hundred portraits and views have
been added, for the most part proofs on India paper.

Presentation copy from Thomas Moore to Lord Mountjoy, with the poet's
inscription.


MOORE, THOMAS.--Memoirs of the Life of the Right Honourable Richard
Brinsley Sheridan. By Thomas Moore. The fifth edition . . . London:
printed for Longman, . . . 1827. _8vo, two volumes, original boards,
uncut edges._

Portrait of Sheridan by Fry after Reynolds.


MOORE, THOMAS.--The Epicurean, a Tale, with [4] vignette illustrations
by J. M. W. Turner, . . . and Alciphron, a poem. By Thomas Moore . . .
London: John Macrone . . . 1839. _Post 8vo, half brown levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Krafft._


MOORE, THOMAS.--The Poetical Works of Thomas Moore, collected by
himself. In ten volumes. . . . London: Longman, Orme, Brown, Green, &
Longmans, . . . 1840. _Post 8vo, ten volumes, original green cloth,
uncut edges._

First collected edition. Dedicated to the Marquis of Lansdown.

Portrait by Charles Heath after Sir Thomas Lawrence, and frontispieces
and engraved titles by Frederick and Alfred Heath after Maclise and
George Jones.


MOORE, THOMAS.--Moore's Irish Melodies. Illustrated by D. Maclise, . . .
London: printed for Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, . . . 1846.
_4to, decorated boards, uncut edges._

One hundred and sixty-one designs by Maclise and the letter-press
engraved on steel by E. P. Becker, on fine, thick paper.


MOORE, THOMAS.--The Poetical Works of Thomas Moore. With a Memoir. . . .
Boston: Little, Brown, and Company. 1865. _12mo, six volumes, half green
cloth, uncut edges._

No. 13 of one hundred copies printed on large paper, with portrait on
India paper.


MOORE, THOMAS.--Memoirs, Journal, and Correspondence of Thomas Moore.
Edited by . . . Lord John Russell . . . London: Longman [&c] . . . 1853
[-'56.] _Crown 8vo, eight volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Sixteen portraits and views engraved on steel.


MOORE, THOMAS.--[Songs in Thomas Moore's autograph]   _Oblong 8vo, red
morocco, gilt edges._

Fifteen sheets of musical score, containing Moore's twelve "Legendary
Ballads," in part, set to music by Bishop, May 10, 15, and 22, 1828,
with the text in Moore's handwriting. The poems are The Voice, called in
manuscript, The Legend of the Voice, 3 out of 7 stanzas; Cupid and
Psyche, without title, 8 stanzas; Hero and Leander, called the Legend of
Hero and Leander, 2 out of 3 stanzas; The Leaf and the Fountain, 5
stanzas; Cephalus and Procris, called The Hunter, 3 stanzas; The Indian
Boat, 2 out of 3 stanzas; Youth and Age, without title, 3 out of 4
stanzas; The Dying Warrior, without title, 5 stanzas; The Magic Mirror,
called The Legend of the Mirror, 6 out of 8 stanzas; The Pilgrim,
without title, 4 stanzas; The High born Ladye, 8 stanzas without musical
score on a separate sheet, with a note by Moore; and The Stranger,
called The heart-wounded Stranger, 5 stanzas of score, and 3 on a
separate sheet of paper.

The variations between the manuscript and printed text are numerous,
e.g., in The Voice, "soft as in hours of delight long ago" is printed
(Poetical Works, 1841) "soft as in moments of bliss long ago;" "'twas in
vain She tried to forget it" is printed "'twas in vain To chase the
illusion."


MOORE, SIR THOMAS.--Mangora, King of the Timbusians. or the Faithful
Couple. A Tragedy. By Sir Thomas Moore. [Two lines in Latin from
Persias, one from Ovid, one from Martial] London: Printed for W. Harvey
. . . and E. Nutt . . . 1718. _4to, green levant morocco, gilt and
mosaic back, side corners, and centre ornament, gilt edges, by
Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A2-H4 in fours, title on A2.


MORAES, FRANCISCO DE.--Palmerin of England, by Francisco de Moraes
[corrected by Robert Southey, from the original Portuguese]   London:
printed for Longman . . . 1807. _12mo, four volumes, tree calf, gilt
back, by Riviere._


MORE, HANNAH.--Percy, a tragedy. As it is acted at the Theatre-Royal in
Covent-Garden. London: Printed for T. Cadell, . . . M DCC LXX VIII. . . .
_8vo, red morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Prologue and Epilogue by Garrick, Dedication to Earl
Percy. A-M in fours.


MORE, HANNAH.--Florio: a tale, for fine gentlemen and fine ladies: and,
The Bas Bleu; or, Conversation: two poems. London: printed for T.
Cadell, . . . M DCC LXXXVI. . . . _4to, half brown straight-grain
morocco, gilt top._

First edition. The first poem is dedicated to Horace Walpole, the second
to Mrs. Vesey.


MORGAN, LADY SYDNEY.--The Wild Irish Girl, a national tale. By Miss
Owenson, . . . The fifth edition. In three volumes. . . . London:
printed for Longman Hurst, Rees Orme and Brown, . . . 1813. _12mo, three
volumes, green figured silk, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


MORGAN, LADY SYDNEY.--The Life and Times of Salvator Rosa. By Lady
Morgan . . . London. Printed for Henry Colburn . . . 1824. _8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Portrait of Salvator Rosa engraved by Cooper.


MORIER, JAMES.--The Mirza. By James Morier, Esq. Author of "Hajji Baba,"
"Zohrab," "Ayesha," &c.   London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1841. _8vo,
three volumes, Scotch plaid silk, uncut edges._

First edition.


MORIER, JAMES.--The Adventures of Hajji Baba of Ispahan by James Morier
Edited by C. J. Wills, . . . with an introduction by Major-Gen. Sir
Frederic Goldsmid, . . . Illustrated. London   Lawrence & Bullen, . . .
1897. _Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


MORLEY, HENRY.--Memoirs of Bartholomew Fair by Henry Morley. With
facsimile drawings, engraved upon wood, by the Brothers Dalziel. . . .
London: Chapman and Hall, . . . 1859. _8vo, cloth, red top, uncut
edges._

Inserted is an autograph letter from Morley, dated January 24, 1858,
referring to "Bartholomew Fayre."


MORLEY, JOHN.--Critical Miscellanies. By John Morley. London: Chapman
and Hall, . . . 1871. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition of the First Series.


MORLEY, JOHN.--Voltaire. By John Morley. London: Chapman and Hall . . .
1872. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


MORLEY, JOHN.--Rousseau. By John Morley. . . . London: Chapman and Hall,
. . . 1873. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


MORLEY, JOHN.--Critical Miscellanies. Second series. By John Morley.
London: Chapman and Hall . . . 1877. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


MORLEY, JOHN.--Diderot and the Encyclopaedists. By John Morley London:
Chapman and Hall . . . 1878. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The Defence of Guenevere and other poems. By William
Morris. London: Bell and Daldy . . . [Chiswick Press] 1858. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The Defence of Guenevere, and other Poems. By William
Morris. (Reprinted without alteration from the edition of 1858.) London:
Ellis & White, . . . 1875. _8vo, original boards, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, twenty-five printed.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The Defence of Guenevere, & other Poems. By William
Morris. [Reeves & Turner, London, 1892] _Small 4to, vellum wrappers,
uncut edges._

Three hundred copies printed by William Morris at the Kelmscott Press.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The Life and Death of Jason a poem by William Morris.
London: Bell and Daldy . . . 1867. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The Life and Death of Jason a poem [woodcut] by
William Morris, . . . Fourth edition. London: F. S. Ellis, . . . M DCCC
LXIX. _8vo, original boards, uncut edges._

One of a small issue printed from the stereotyped plates on large and
thick Whatman paper.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The Earthly Paradise a Poem [woodcut] by William
Morris, . . . London: F. S. Ellis, . . . M DCCC LXVIII. [-M DCCC LXX.]
_8vo, four parts in six volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

First edition. Large paper copy, twenty-five printed. Title-page woodcut
engraved by Morris after the design of Sir E. Burne-Jones.


MORRIS AND MAGNUSSON, _translators_.--Grettis Saga. The Story of Grettir
the Strong   translated from the Icelandic   by Eirikr Magnusson, . . .
and William Morris, . . . London: F. S. Ellis, . . . M DCCC LXIX. _8vo,
original boards, uncut edges._

First edition: with map.


MORRIS AND MAGNUSSON, _translators_.--Voelsunga Saga. The Story of the
Volsungs & Niblungs with certain songs from the Elder Edda. Translated
from the Icelandic by Eirikr Magnusson, . . . and William Morris, . . .
London: F. S. Ellis, . . . M DCCC LXX. _8vo, original boards, uncut
edges._

First edition. One of twelve copies printed on large paper.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--Love is Enough or the Freeing of Pharamond a morality.
By William Morris. London: Ellis & White, . . . 1873. _8vo, original
boards, uncut edges._

First edition. One of twenty-five copies printed on large paper.


MORRIS AND MAGNUSSON, _translators_.--Three Northern Love Stories, and
other tales. Translated from the Icelandic   by Eirikr Magnusson and
William Morris. London: Ellis & White, . . . 1875. _8vo, original
boards, uncut edges._

First edition. Large paper copy, twenty-five printed.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The AEneids of Virgil done into English verse by
William Morris, . . . London: Ellis and White, . . . M DCCC LXXVI. _8vo,
two volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

First edition. Large paper copy, twenty-five printed.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The Story of Sigurd the Volsung and the Fall of the
Niblungs. By William Morris, . . . London: Ellis and White, . . .
MDCCCLXXVII. _8vo, brown levant morocco, back and sides richly tooled,
embossed gold over green edges, by Cobden-Sanderson, 1889._

First edition.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--Hopes and Fears for Art. Five lectures delivered in
Birmingham, London, and Nottingham, 1878-1881. By William Morris. . . .
London: Ellis & White, . . . 1882. _8vo, original boards, uncut edges._

First edition. Large paper copy, twenty-five printed.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--A Dream of John Ball and a King's Lesson. (reprinted
from the "Commonweal.") By William Morris . . . With an Illustration by
Edward Burne-Jones. London: Reeves & Turner . . . MDCCCLXXXVIII. _Square
post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--A Dream of John Ball and a King's Lesson. By William
Morris. [Printed by William Morris at the Kelmscott Press, and Sold by
Reeves & Turner, London, 1892] _Small 4to, green levant morocco, back
and sides covered, with panels of fillets, doubled with maroon morocco,
Gasconesque borders, maroon silk guards, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Zaehnsdorf._

Three hundred copies printed. The woodcut was designed by Sir E.
Burne-Jones.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--A Dream of John Ball. 1892. _Small 4to, vellum
wrappers, uncut edges._

One of eleven copies printed on vellum.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--A Tale of the House of the Wolfings and all the
Kindreds of the Mark written in prose and verse by William Morris . . .
London 1889: Reeves and Turner . . . _4to, buckram, uncut edges._

First edition. One of one hundred copies printed on large paper.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The Roots of the Mountains wherein is told somewhat of
the lives of the men of Burgdale their friends their neighbours their
foemen and their fellows in arms by William Morris . . . London MDCCCXC:
Reeves and Turner . . . _4to, original tapestry bindings uncut edges._

First edition. Large paper copy, two hundred and fifty printed.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The Story of the Glittering Plain which has been also
called the Land of Living Men or the Acre of the Undying. Written by
William Morris, [initial letters from designs by William Morris.]
[Reeves and Turner, London] 1891. _Small 4to, vellum wrappers, uncut
edges._

The first edition was the first book printed by Morris at the Kelmscott
Press, in the same year. The work originally appeared as a serial in the
_English Illustrated Magazine_, Volume VII, pages 687, 754, 824, and
884.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The Story of the Glittering Plain which has been also
called the Land of living Men or the Acre of the Undying. Written by
William Morris. [23 woodcuts by Walter Crane] [Kelmscott Press, William
Morris, 1894] _Folio, vellum wrappers, uncut edges._

One of two hundred and fifty copies printed.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--Poems by the Way. Written by William Morris [Reeves
and Turner, London 1891] _Small 4to, vellum wrappers, uncut edges._

First edition. Three hundred copies printed by William Morris at the
Kelmscott Press.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--News from Nowhere or an epoch of rest, being some
chapters from a Utopian romance by William Morris . . . second edition.
London: Reeves & Turner . . . 1891. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

The first edition also was printed in 1891. The story ran as a serial
through thirty-nine numbers of _The Commonweal_.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--News from Nowhere; or, an Epoch of Rest. Being some
chapters from a Utopian Romance. By William Morris [Reeves & Turner,
London   1892] _8vo, vellum wrappers, uncut edges._

Three hundred copies printed by William Morris at the Kelmscott Press.
The woodcut was designed by C. M. Gere.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--News from Nowhere. 1892. _8vo, vellum wrappers, uncut
edges._

One of ten copies printed on vellum.


MORRIS, WILLIAM, _translator_.--The Order of Chivalry. [Reprinted from
Caxton's edition of 1484. With L'Ordene de Chevalerie, a French poem of
the 13^{th} Century by Hues de Tabarie--translated by William Morris]
[Reeves and Turner, London 1893] _Small 4to, vellum wrappers, uncut
edges._

Two hundred and twenty-five copies printed by William Morris at the
Kelmscott Press, with a woodcut designed by Burne-Jones.


MORRIS, WILLIAM, _translator_.--The Order of Chivalry. 1893. _Small 4to,
vellum wrappers, uncut edges._

One of ten copies printed on vellum.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--Gothic Architecture: a Lecture for the Arts and Crafts
Exhibition Society. By William Morris [London, 1893] _16mo, boards,
uncut edges._

One of ten copies printed on vellum, by William Morris, at the Kelmscott
Press.

The first Kelmscott book printed in 16mo. The type was set up at
Hammersmith, and copies printed at the New Gallery during the
exhibition. The four-line initials used in it appear here for the first
time.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--Arts and Crafts Essays By Members of the Arts and
Crafts Exhibition Society With a Preface   By William Morris   London
Rivington, Percival, & Co. 1893. _Crown 8vo, buckram, uncut edges._

The essay on "Printing," which in the 1888 Arts and Crafts Exhibition
Catalogue was written by Mr. Emery Walker alone, is here recast and
issued under the names of William Morris and Emery Walker.


MORRIS, WILLIAM, _translator_.--The Tale of King Florus and the Fair
Jehane. [a French Story of the 13^{th} Century, done into English by
William Morris] [London 1893] _16mo, boards, uncut edges._

One of twelve copies printed on vellum at the Kelmscott Press.


MORRIS, WILLIAM, _translator_.--Of the Friendship of Amis and Amile
[done out of the ancient French into English, by William Morris] [London
1894] _16mo, boards, uncut edges._

One of fifteen vellum copies, printed by William Morris at the Kelmscott
Press.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The Wood beyond the World. By William Morris.
[Kelmscott Press, 1894] _Small 4to, vellum wrappers, uncut edges._

Three hundred and fifty copies printed, with woodcut frontispiece by Sir
Edward Burne-Jones, and borders. The borders and half borders are here
used for the first time.


MORRIS, WILLIAM.--The Well at the World's End By William Morris
[Kelmscott Press, William Morris, 1896] _4to, vellum wrappers, uncut
edges._

One of eight copies printed on vellum, with four illustrations by Sir
Edward Burne-Jones.


MORRISIANA.--A Bibliography of the Works of William Morris by Temple
Scott   London: Geo. Bell & Sons [Chiswick Press] MDCCCXCVII. _Post 8vo,
buckram, gilt top, uncut edges._


MOSCHELES, IGNACE, _editor_.--The Life of Beethoven, including his
correspondence with his friends, numerous characteristic traits, and
remarks on his musical works. Edited by Ignace Moscheles . . . London:
Henry Colburn . . . 1841. _12mo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait, facsimile, etc.


MOSES, HENRY.--A Collection of Vases, Altars, Paterae, Tripods,
Candelabra, Sarcophagi, &c. from various museums and collections,
engraved on 170 plates [several coloured] by Henry Moses. With
historical essays, [by Thomas Hope] [London, 1814] _4to, one volume in
two, blue levant morocco, back and side borders tooled in a conventional
design of rectangular fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

First edition, large paper copy. The plates are all dated October 1,
1811; the Preface, London, 1814.


MOSES, HENRY.--Vases from the Collection of Sir Henry Englefield, Bart.
drawn and engraved by H. Moses. London: printed for Rodwell and Martin
. . . [1819] _4to, green morocco, gilt and blind tooled, wide morocco
panel border inside, tooled with arabesques, &c., gilt edges._

Thirty-one plates, one coloured.


MOTHERWELL, WILLIAM.--Minstrelsy: Ancient and Modern, with an Historical
Introduction and Notes. By William Motherwell John Wylie:--Glasgow
MDCCCXXVII. _4to, calf, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by Bedford._

Frontispiece, engraved title-page, appendix, and nine pages of music,
generally lacking.


MOTLEY, JOHN LOTHROP.--The Rise of the Dutch Republic. A History. By
John Lothrop Motley. London: John Chapman . . . MDCCCLVI. _8vo, three
volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Matthews._

Illustrated by the insertion of fifty-two portraits and views, many
proofs and all selected impressions, by Hollar, Crispin de Pass,
Moncornet, De Leu, Lombart, Houbraken, etc.


MOTLEY, JOHN LOTHROP.--History of the United Netherlands from the Death
of William the Silent to the Synod of Dort. With a full view of the
English-Dutch struggle against Spain, and of the Origin and Destruction
of the Spanish Armada. By John Lothrop Motley. London, John Murray . . .
1860[-'67.] _8vo, four volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by Matthews._

Illustrated by the insertion of eighty-one portraits and views, many
proofs, including brilliant specimens of engraving by Crispin de Pass,
Blooteling, Kilian, Moncornet, Houbraken, Visscher, and other famous
copper-plate engravers, in addition to the illustrations published with
the work.


MOTLEY, JOHN LOTHROP.--The Life and Death of John of Barneveld, Advocate
of Holland; with a view of the primary causes and movements of the
Thirty Years' War. By John Lothrop Motley, . . . With illustrations.
London: John Murray, . . . 1874. _8vo, two volumes, original cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition: steel portrait and three woodcut illustrations.


MOTLEY, JOHN LOTHROP.--The Correspondence of John Lothrop Motley . . .
Edited by George William Curtis   With portrait . . . New York   Harper
& Brothers, . . . 1889. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._


MOULTRIE, JOHN.--Poems by John Moultrie Second edition   London
William Pickering   1838. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of the Three Sons by Aug. Fox after Corden.


MOZART, WOLFGANG AMADEUS.--The Letters of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
(1769-1791) translated, from the collection of Ludwig Nohl, by Lady
Wallace. With a portrait and facsimile. London: Longmans, Green, and Co.
1865. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


MUGGLETONIAN SONGS.--Divine Songs of the Muggletonians, in grateful
praise to the only true God, the Lord Jesus Christ. . . . London:
printed by R. Brown, . . . 1829. _Post 8vo, boards, uncut edges._

Portrait of Ludowicke Muggleton by J. Kennerley.


MUeLLER, FRIEDRICH MAX.--Chips from a German Workshop by F. Max Mueller . . .
London: Longmans . . . 1880. _8vo, four volumes, half blue morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges._


MULOCK, DINAH MARIA.--Poems, by the author of "John Halifax" . . .
London, Hurst and Blackett [n. d.] _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Frontispiece and engraved title by Birket Foster.


MUNCHAUSEN, BARON.--(I.) The Seventh Edition, Considerably enlarged,
and ornamented with Twenty Explanatory Engravings, from Original
Designs. Gulliver Revived: or, The Vice of Lying properly exposed.
Containing singular travels, campaigns, voyages, and adventures in
Russia, the Caspian Sea, Iceland, Turkey, Egypt, Gibraltar, up the
Mediterranean, on the Atlantic Ocean, and through the centre of Mount
AEtna, into the South Sea. Also, An Account of a Voyage into the Moon and
Dog-star; with many extraordinary Particulars relative to the Cooking
Animal in those Planets, which are there called the Human Species. By
Baron Munchausen. London: Printed for C. and G. Kearsley, . . . M. DCC.
XCIII. (II.) A New Edition, (With Twenty capital Copper-Plates,
including the Baron's Portrait) A Sequel to the Adventures of Baron
Munchausen, Containing his expedition into Africa.--How he out-does
Alexander. . . . humbly dedicated to Mr. Bruce, the Abyssinian
traveller, . . . London. Printed for H. D. Symonds, . . . M DCC XCVI.
_12mo, two volumes in one, red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

Volume I contains twenty scenes on eight plates, Volume II, a
frontispiece portrait and nineteen other plates.


MUNCHAUSEN, BARON.--(I.) The Eighth Edition, Ornamented with Twenty
Explanatory Engravings, from Original Designs. Gulliver Revived: or, The
Vice of Lying properly exposed containing singular travels, campaigns,
voyages, and adventures in Russia, the Caspian Sea, Iceland, Turkey,
Egypt, Gibraltar, up the Mediterranean, on the Atlantic Ocean, and
through the centre of Mount AEtna into the South Sea, also, An Account of
a Voyage into the Moon and Dog-star; with many extraordinary Particulars
relative to the Cooking Animal in those Planets, which are there called
the Human Species. By Baron Munchausen. London: Printed for G. Kearsley
. . . 1799. (II). . . . A Sequel to the Adventures of Baron Munchausen
. . . humbly dedicated to M^{r} Bruce the Abyssinian Traveller . . .
London: Printed for H. D. Symonds . . . 1801. _12mo, two volumes in one,
tree calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Twenty illustrations to each part, the Sequel containing a portrait of
the Baron.


MUNCHAUSEN, BARON.--The Surprising Adventures of Baron Munchausen
illustrated by William Strang and J. B. Clark, with an introduction by
Thomas Seccombe   London   Lawrence and Bullen . . . 1895. _Crown 8vo,
cloth._


MURCHISON, SIR RODERICK IMPEY.--Siluria. A History of the oldest Rocks
in the British Isles and other countries;. . . by Sir Roderick Impey
Murchison, . . . Fourth edition, Including "The Silurian System," with
a map, much new matter, and many illustrations. . . . London: John
Murray, . . . 1867. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


MURPHY, ARTHUR.--The Old Maid. A comedy In two acts, As it is Performed
at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. By Mr. Murphy. . . . London: Printed
for P. Vaillant, . . . M DCC LXI. _8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


MURPHY, ARTHUR.--All in the Wrong. a comedy. As it is Acted at the
Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane, By Mr. Murphy. . . . London: Printed for P.
Vaillant, . . . MDCCLXI. . . . _8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. A2-P2 in fours, title on A3.


MURPHY, ARTHUR.--The Apprentice. A farce. In two acts. As it is
performed at the Theatre-Royal, in Drury-Lane. By Mr. Murphy. London,
Printed for P. Vaillant. 1764. _8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Prologue by Garrick. A-G in fours, half-title on A1.


MURPHY, ARTHUR.--What we must All come to. A comedy   In two acts, As
it was intended to be Acted at the Theatre-Royal in Convent-Garden. . . .
London, Printed for P. Vaillant, . . . M DCC LXIV. _8vo, morocco, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition. Reprinted in 1776 as "Three Weeks after Marriage."


MURPHY, ARTHUR.--The School for Guardians. A comedy. As it is Performing
at the Theatre-Royal in Covent-Garden. . . . London: Printed for P.
Vaillant, . . . M DCC LXVII. _8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


MUSA PROTERVA.--See Love Poems.


MUSE.--The Muse an Advocate for Injur'd Merit. In an Epistle To the
Right Honourable Sir Robert Walpole . . . London: Printed for J.
Roberts, . . . MDCCXXXIV. _Folio, red levant morocco, by The Club
Bindery. Bound with ten other works._


NAPIER, LORD.--Notes on Modern Painting at Naples. By Lord Napier.
London John W. Parker and Son . . . 1855. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


NAPLES and the Campagna Felice. In a Series of Letters, addressed to a
friend in England, in 1802. London: published by R. Ackermann . . .
1815. _Royal 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Amand._

Two maps, title-page, and fifteen plates, all in colours, nine by
Rowlandson.


NAPOLEON BONAPARTE.--Memoirs of the History of France during the reign
of Napoleon, dictated by the Emperor at Saint Helena to the generals
[Montholon, Gourgaud, &c] who shared his captivity; and published from
the original manuscripts corrected by himself. . . . London: printed for
Henry Colburn and Co. . . . 1823. [-1824] _8vo, seven volumes, blue
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

Eight facsimiles, eight maps, and two diagrams.

The Memoirs occupy four volumes, the Historical Miscellanies three.


NAPOLEON BONAPARTE.--Napoleon in the other World. A narrative written by
himself: and found near his tomb in the Island of St. Helena, by
Xongo-tee-foh-tchi, mandarin of the third class. . . . London: Henry
Colburn, . . . 1827. _8vo, blue straight-grain morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by R. Stagg._

Frontispiece by T. Dighton.


NARES, EDWARD.--Heraldic Anomalies   Second Edition   London: G. and W.
B. Whittaker . . . 1824. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back,
citron edges, by Bedford._


NARRATIVE of the Journey of an Irish Gentleman through England in the
year 1752. Edited from a contemporary manuscript, with a few
illustrative notes, [by Henry Huth.] London: printed at the Chiswick
Press. 1869. _8vo, brown levant morocco, doubled with maroon russia,
russia guards, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

One of fifty copies printed.


NASH, RICHARD.--See Goldsmith, Oliver.


NATIONAL ACADEMY.--The National Academy of Design. Ceremonies on the
occasion of Laying the Corner-Stone, October 21st, 1863. and the
Inauguration of the Building, April 27th, 1865. New York: Miller and
Mathews. M. DCCC. LXV. _Royal 8vo, original paper wrappers, uncut
edges._

Frontispiece on India paper.


NATURALIST'S LIBRARY.--The Naturalist's Library, [conducted by Sir
William Jardine] Ichthyology. . . . Edinburgh: W. H. Lizars, and
Stirling & Kenney; . . . 1835. [-1843] _Post 8vo, five volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

Volume I, The Perch Family, by Sir William Jardine, is dated 1835;
Volume II, Treating of the nature, structure, and economical uses of
fishes, by J. S. Bushnan, M. D., 1840; Volume III, Fishes of Guiana.
Part I, by Robert H. Schomburgk, 1841; Volume IV, British Fishes. Part
I, by Robert Hamilton, M. D., 1843; Volume V, Fishes of Guiana. Part
II, by Robert H. Schomburgk, 1843.

Five frontispiece portraits and engraved titles, by Lizars, and one
hundred and fifty-nine plates, for the most part coloured.


NATURALIST'S POCKET BOOK.--The Naturalists Pocket Book. Ornamented with
most Elegant Engravings. Illustrated by Corresponding Descriptions,
Accompanied with an Almanack. &c   London. Printed for G. Kearsley,
Fleet Street [1796] _Small 4to, old red morocco, elaborately tooled, and
inlaid with curious multiform panels of barbaric design, enclosed in a
case of the same pattern._

Engraved title-page, with coloured vignette, coloured frontispiece, and
twelve full-page illustrations by Barlow.


NATURE IN PERFECTION; or, The Mother unveil'd: being A Congratulatory
Poem to Mrs. Bret, upon his Majesty's most gracious Pardon granted to
Mr. Richard Savage, Son of the late Earl Rivers. . . . London: Printed
for T. Green, . . . and Sold by J. Roberts . . . M DCC XXVIII. . . .
_Folio, boards, by The Club Bindery._


NEANDER, AUGUSTUS.--The History of the Christian Religion and Church
during the three first centuries. By Dr. Augustus Neander. Translated
from the German, by Henry John Rose, . . . Second edition. London:
printed for J. G. F. & J. Rivington, . . . 1842. [-1841] _8vo, two
volumes, half light brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Volume II is the first edition.


NEVE, PHILIP.--Cursory Remarks on Some of the Ancient English Poets,
particularly Milton . . . London. M.DCC.LXXXIX. _8vo, half calf gilt
top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Large paper copy.


NEW BALLAD.--A New Ballad. To the Tune of, London is a fine Town, &c.
London: Printed for J. Smith . . . MDCC XXVI. _Folio, boards, by The
Club Bindery._


NEWTON, SIR CHARLES THOMAS.--Travels and Discoveries in the Levant. By
C. T. Newton, . . . With numerous illustrations. . . . Day & Son, . . .
1865. . . . _8vo, two volumes, half russia, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Two maps, thirty-nine plates, and thirty-eight woodcuts.


NEW YORK CHARTER.--The Charter And the Several Laws, Orders & Ordinances
Established by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the
City of New-York   Conven'd in Common Council, For the good Rule and
Government of the Inhabitants of the said City. Published this first
Day of December, in the Mayoralty of Jacobus van Cortland, Esq; Annoq;
Domini 1719. Printed and Sold by William Bradford in the City of
New-York, 1719. _Folio, brown levant morocco, back and sides richly
tooled, silk linings, gilt edges, by Riviere._

The first printed Laws and Charter of the City of New York, with the
revised ordinance "prevention of fire" on the fifth page.


NEW YORK CITY during the American Revolution, being a Collection of
Original Papers (now first published) from the Manuscripts in the
possession of the Mercantile Library Association of New York City [with
an Introduction by H. B. Dawson] Privately printed for the Association
[by C. A. Alvord] 1861. _4to, brown morocco, back and sides in gold and
mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by Pawson and Nicholson._

Map of New York and plan, also (inserted) fifteen views and six
portraits.


NEW YORK DIRECTORY.--The New-York Directory, containing, A Valuable and
well Calculated Almanack; . . . Tables of the different Coins,
suitable for any State, and digested in such order, as to render an
Exchange between any of the United States plain and easy.

  Likewise,

  1. The names of all the Citizens,
  their occupations
  and places of abode.

  2. The members in Congress,
  from what state,
  and where residing.

  3. Grand departments of
  the United States for adjusting
  public accounts,
  and by whom conducted.

  4. Members in Senate and
  Assembly, from what
  county, and where residing.

  5. Judges, Aldermen, and
  other civil officers, with
  their places of abode.

  6. Public state-offices, and
  by whom kept.

  7. Counsellers at law, and
  where residing.

  8. Ministers of the gospel,
  where residing, and of
  what Church.

  9. Physicians, Surgeons, and
  their places of abode.

  10. President, Directors,
  days, and hours of business
  at the Bank.

  11. Professors, &c. of the
  university of Columbia
  college.

  12. Rates of porterage, as
  by law established.

  13. Arrivals and departures
  of the mails at the Post-Office.

  By David Franks.

New York: Printed by Shepard Kollock, corner of Wall and Water Streets,
M, DCC, LXXX, VI. _16mo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, side panels,
gilt edges, with the original grey covers bound in, by F. Bedford._

First edition.


NEW YORK LAWS.--Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and Constitutions, ordained,
made and established, by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and
Assistants, of the City of New-York, Convened in Common-Council, for
The good Rule and Government of the Inhabitants and Residents of the
said City. Published the Twenty-Seventh Day of January, and the
First Day of February, in the Twenty Second Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord George the Second, . . . Annoque Domini 1748. And in the
Mayoralty of Edward Holland, Esq;

To which is added, An Appendix, Containing Extracts of sundry Acts of
the General Assembly of the Colony of New-York, immediately relating to
the good Government of the said City and Corporation. Printed and Sold
by J. Parker, at the New Printing Office, in Bever Street, 1749. _Folio,
bound with WILLIAM LIVINGSTON'S "Independent Reflector" and "The
Occasional Reverberator."_

One of four copies on record. The other three are in the Lenox Library,
the Philadelphia Public Library, and the Tower collection of American
Laws in the library of the Pennsylvania Historical Society.


NEW YORK PARKS.--First Annual Report of the Board of Commissioners of
the Department of Public Parks for the year ending May 1, 1871. New
York: William C. Bryant & Co., 1871. _Royal 8vo, half red morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Fifty illustrations.


NICHOLS, JOHN.--Biographical and literary Anecdotes of William Bowyer,
Printer, F. S. A. and of many of his learned friends. Containing an
incidental view of the progress and advancement of literature in this
kingdom from the beginning of the present century to the end of the year
M DCCLXX VII. By John Nichols, his apprentice, partner, and successor
. . . . London: printed by and for the author. MDCCLXXXII. _4to, half red
levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

Second edition. Portrait of Bowyer by J. Basire.


NICHOLS, JOHN.--Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century; comprizing
Biographical Memoirs of William Bowyer, Printer, F. S. A. and many of
his learned friends; an incidental view of the progress and advancement
of literature in this kingdom during the last century; and biographical
anecdotes of a considerable number of eminent writers and ingenious
artists; with a very copious index. By John Nichols, . . . In six
volumes. . . . London: printed for the author, by Nichols, Son, and
Bentley, . . . 1812-15. _8vo, nine volumes, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

The title-page of Volume VII reads "in seven volumes," 1813, and the
volume contains a second part, dated 1816, although the pagination is
continuous; Volume VIII is dated 1814, and Volume IX, 1815.

Fourteen portraits and one facsimile.


NICHOLS, JOHN.--Illustrations of the Literary History of the Eighteenth
Century. Consisting of Authentic Memoirs and Original Letters of Eminent
Persons; and intended as a Sequel to The Literary Anecdotes. By John
Nichols, . . . London: printed for the Author, by Nichols, Son, and
Bentley, . . . 1817-58. _8vo, eight volumes, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Sixty-two portraits and one other plate in two compartments.

Volumes I and II are dated 1817; Volume III, 1818; IV, 1822; V, 1828;
VI, 1831; VII, 1848; and VIII, 1858. The title-page reads "To which are
appended Additions to the Literary Anecdotes and Literary
Illustrations."

Volumes VII and VIII were written by John Bowyer Nichols; Volumes V and
VI were posthumous publications.


NICHOLS, JOHN.--Biographical Anecdotes of William Hogarth; with a
catalogue of his works chronologically arranged; and occasional remarks.
The third edition, enlarged and corrected. London: printed by and for
John Nichols, . . . MDCCLXXXV. _8vo, half green morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Engraved title.


NICHOLS, JOHN.--See Hogarth, William.


NICHOLS, T.--A handy-book of the British Museum, for every-day readers.
By T. Nichols, . . . London: Cassell, Petter, and Galpin, . . . 1870.
_Crown 8vo, cloth._

Sixteen plates and numerous woodcuts in the text.


NICOLAS, SIR NICHOLAS HARRIS.--Memoirs and Remains of Lady Jane Grey: by
Nicholas Harris Nicolas . . . New [second] edition. London: Henry
Colburn and Richard Bentley, . . . 1831. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt
back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Large paper copy, with India proof portrait of Lady Jane Grey by Dean
after De Heere, and forty inserted plates, including a coloured drawing
and several proofs.


NICOLAS, SIR NICHOLAS HARRIS.--The Lives of Walton and Cotton by Sir
Harris Nicholas   London   William Pickering   1837. _Imperial 8vo, half
brown morocco, uncut edges._

Four portraits on steel.

One of twenty-five copies printed. The sheets are the same as in Volume
I of the Pickering edition of "The Complete Angler," 1836, with a new
title-page.


NIGHTINGALE.--The Nightingale: a choice selection of the most admired
popular Songs, heroic, plaintive, sentimental, humourous, and
bacchanalian. Arranged for the Violin, Flute, and Voice. By the editor
of the "Skylark" and "Thrush" . . . London: published by Thomas Tegg, . . .
[n. d.] _12mo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

Engraved frontispiece-title with vignette, by Freeman after Corbould.


NIGHTINGALE VALLEY.--Nightingale Valley. A collection, including a great
number of the choicest Lyrics and Short Poems in the English Language.
Edited by Giraldus . . . London: Bell and Daldy . . . 1860. _Post 8vo,
blue levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back panels, gilt edges, by
Holloway._


NOBLE, J. ASHCROFT.--The Sonnet in England & other Essays by J. Ashcroft
Noble   London   Elkin Mathews and John Lane. 1893. _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

No. 26 of fifty large paper copies printed.


NODIER, CHARLES.--The Bibliomaniac by Charles Nodier with forty-five
illustrations from designs by Maurice Leloir, engraved on wood by F.
Noel, and a Preface by R. Vallery-Radot. Translated by Mabel Osgood
Wright J. O. Wright & Company   New York   MDCCCXCIV. _8vo, red levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 64 of one hundred and fifty copies printed on Japan paper, with a
duplicate set of the illustrations.


NODIER, CHARLES.--The Bibliomaniac. 1894. _8vo, red levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges._

Another copy, one of five presentation copies printed upon India paper.


"NORTH, CHRISTOPHER."--See Wilson, John.


NORTH, ROGER.--The Lives of the Right Hon. Francis North, Baron
Guilford, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, under King Charles II. and King
James II. The Hon. Sir Dudley North, Commissioner of the Customs, and
afterwards of the Treasury, to King Charles II. and the Hon. and Rev.
Dr. John North, Master of Trinity College, Cambridge, and Clerk of the
Closet to King Charles II. By the Hon. Roger North. A new edition. With
notes and illustrations, historical and biographical. . . . London:
Henry Colburn, . . . 1826. _8vo, three volumes, boards, uncut edges._

Three portraits by R. Cooper.


NORTHALL, W. K., _editor_.--Life and Recollections of Yankee [George
Handel] Hill: together with anecdotes and incidents of his travels.
Edited by Dr. W. K. Northall. New York, published for Mrs. Cordelia
Hill, by W. F. Burgess, . . . 1850. _Small 8vo, cloth._

Portrait and woodcuts.


NORTHCOTE, JAMES.--Memoirs of Sir Joshua Reynolds, Knt. . . . late
President of the Royal Academy. Comprising Original Anecdotes of many
distinguished persons, his contemporaries; and a brief analysis of his
discourses. To which are added, Varieties on Art. By James Northcote, . . .
London: printed for Henry Colburn, . . . 1813. _4to, half calf,
uncut edges._

Portrait by Robert Cooper after John Jackson.


NORTHCOTE, JAMES.--(I.) One Hundred Fables, original and selected, by
James Northcote, R. A. &c &c embellished with two hundred and eighty
engravings on wood   London, Geo: Lawford . . . printed by J. Johnson
1828 (II.) Fables, original and selected. By the late James Northcote,
R. A. Second Series. Illustrated by two hundred and eighty engravings on
wood. [portrait] London: John Murray, . . . MDCCCXXXIIL _Royal 8vo, two
volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

Large paper copy. Rubricated title. Portrait of Northcote inserted, by
Worthington after Barlow, India open letter proof.


NORTHCOTE, JAMES.--Fables. Second Series. 1833. _Crown 8vo, half brown
morocco, uncut edges._

Another copy, printed on India paper.


NORTHCOTE, JAMES.--Proof Illustrations to Northcote's Fables; and of the
Ornamental Letters and Vignettes by William Harvey. London: Geo: Lawford
. . . printed by J. Johnson 1828. _Royal 8vo, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, by Chambolle-Duru._

Printed entirely on India paper, with title-page rubricated.


NORTHCOTE, JAMES.--The Life of Titian: with Anecdotes of the
distinguished persons of his time. By James Northcote . . . London,
Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley . . . 1830. _8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

Portrait of Titian engraved by Dean.

Written chiefly by William Hazlitt.


NORTON, JOHN.--The Redeemed Captive. Being a Narrative Of the taking and
carrying into Captivity The Reverend Mr. John Norton, when
Fort-Massachusetts Surrendered to a large Body of French and
Indians, August 20th 1746.

With a particular Account of the Defence made before the Surrender of
that Fort, with the Articles of Capitulation &c. Together with an
Account, both entertaining and affecting, of what Mr. Norton met with,
and took Notice of, in his travelling to, and while in Captivity at
Canada, and 'till his Arrival at Boston, on August 16. 1747. Written
by Himself. [Ten lines of Biblical quotations] Boston: Printed & Sold
opposite the Prison. 1748. _12mo, light brown levant morocco, gilt
back, side compartments in a conventional floral and foliage design,
uncut edges, in an olive levant morocco case, by Cobden-Sanderson._


NUGENT, GEORGE GRENVILLE, LORD.--Legends of the Library at Lilies, by
the Lord and Lady there. . . . London: printed for Longman, Rees, &c . . .
1832. _Post 8vo, two volumes, original boards, uncut edges._


NURSERY RHYMES.--See Halliwell-Phillipps, J. O.


NUTTALL, THOMAS.--The North American Sylva; or, a Description of the
Forest Trees of the United States, Canada, and Nova Scotia, not
described in the work of F. Andrew Michaux, and containing all the
forest trees discovered in the Rocky Mountains, the Territory of
Oregon, down to the shores of the Pacific and into the confines of
California, as well as in various parts of the United States.
Illustrated by 122 fine [coloured] plates. By Thomas Nuttall, F. L. S.,
. . . Philadelphia: J. Dobson, . . . 1842. [1846, 1849.] _Royal 8vo,
three volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Bedford._

Volume II has the imprint of Townsend Ward, 1846; Volume III, Smith and
Wistar, 1849.

The three are IV, V, and VI of Michaux and Nuttall's "North American
Sylva."


NUTTALL, THOMAS.--See Michaux, F. Andrew.


OCCASIONAL REVERBERATOR.--[First page] The Occasional Reverberator.
Number I. Friday, September 7, 1753. [--Number IV. Friday, October 5,
1753.] [Colophon of Number IV.] New York: Printed by J. Parker, at the
New-Printing-Office, in Beaver-Street. By whom Letters to the Author are
carefully delivered. _Folio, bound with WILLIAM LIVINGSTON'S
"Independent Reflector" and one other work._

A supplement to _The Independent Reflector_, issued only four times.


O'DONOGHUE, FREEMAN M.--A descriptive and classified Catalogue of
Portraits of Queen Elizabeth by Freeman M. O'Donoghue, . . . Bernard
Quaritch [Dryden Press] . . . London 1894. _Royal 8vo, buckram, uncut
edges._

Frontispiece and seven other illustrations.


OGILVIE, JOHN.--Poems on several subjects . . . By John Ogilvie, D. D.
London: Printed for George Pearch, . . . M.DCC.LXIX. _8vo, two volumes,
old red morocco, gilt back, wide border on the side introducing the
thistle, gilt edges. A Scotch binding._

Presentation copy from the author to Lord Adam Gordon.


OGLE, GEORGE.--Gemmae Antiquae Caelatae: or, a Collection of Gems, Wherein
are explained many Particulars relating to the Fable and History, the
Customs and Habits, the Ceremonies and Exercises of the Ancients.
Taken from the classics   By George Ogle Esq; Engraved by Cl. Du Bosc.
The Second Edition. London: Printed for Claude Du Bosc, and William
Darres, . . . M. DCC. XLI. _4to, old red straight-grain morocco, gilt
back, side borders, corner ornaments, gilt edges._

Frontispiece and fifty plates.


O'HARA, KANE.--The Golden Pippin: an English burletta, in three acts. As
it is performed at the Theatre-Royal, Covent-Garden. By the Author of
Midas. London: Printed for T. Becket, . . . M. DCC. LXXIII. . . . _8vo,
morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


O'KEEFE, JOHN.--The Castle of Andalusia. A Comic opera. In three acts.
As performed at the Theatre-Royal, Covent-Garden. Written By John
O'Keefe, . . . London: Printed by H. Baldwin, For T. N. Longman, . . . M
DCC XC IV. _8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


OLDYS, WILLIAM.--Memoirs of Mrs. Anne Oldfield. [Vignette portrait]
London: Printed in the Year M, DCC, XLI. _8vo, brown levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges. Bound with BETTERTON'S "History of the
English Stage," 1741._

Inserted are sixteen portraits and scenes.


OLIPHANT, THOMAS.--La Musa Madrigalesca; or a collection of madrigals,
ballets, roundelays, etc., chiefly of the Elizabeth age; with remarks
and annotations. By Thomas Oliphant, . . . London: Calkin and Budd, . . .
1837. _12mo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Autograph letter and poem inserted, also certificate of the author's
birth.


"OLIVER, STEPHEN."--See Chatto, William Andrew.


OMAR KHAYYAM.--Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam, the Astronomer-Poet of Persia.
Rendered into English verse by Edward Fitzgerald   The Grolier Club of
New York   MDCCCLXXXV. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back and side
border composed of passion-flowers and vine, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Joly._

No. 1 of one hundred and fifty copies printed on Japan paper.


OMAR KHAYYAM.--Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam. 1885. _8vo, blue levant
morocco, back and sides covered with an elaborate Persian design,
doubled with brown morocco, wide border, by Ramage._

Another copy printed on Japan paper.


OMAR KHAYYAM.--The Quatrains of Omar Kheyyam of Nishapour, now first
completely done into English verse from the Persian, in accordance with
the original forms, with a biographical and critical introduction, by
John Payne, . . . London: M DCCC XCVIII: printed for the Villon Society
by private subscription and for private circulation only. _Royal 8vo,
half vellum, uncut edges._

No. Y of a limited edition.


O'MEARA, BARRY EDWARD.--Napoleon in Exile; or, A Voice from St. Helena.
The opinions and reflections of Napoleon on the most important events
of his life and government, in his own words. By Barry E. O'Meara, Esq.
his late surgeon. . . . London: printed for W. Simpkin and R. Marshall,
. . . 1822. _8vo, two volumes, blue straight-grain morocco, gilt back,
gilt edges._

Portraits by T. Woolnoth from a cameo by Morelli and by T. A. Dean from
a medal.


ONE HUNDRED BOOKS famous in English Literature with facsimiles of the
title-pages and an introduction by George E. Woodberry. The Grolier Club
of the City of New York   MCMII. _Royal 8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

One of three hundred and five copies printed on hand-made paper. The
rejected title-page is inserted.


ONE HUNDRED BOOKS--Bibliographical Notes on One Hundred Books Famous in
English Literature compiled by Henry W. Kent The Grolier Club of the
City of New York   MCM III. _Royal 8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

One of three hundred and five copies printed on French hand-made paper.


OPIE, AMELIA ALDERSON.--Poems by Mrs. Opie . . . London: printed for T.
N. Longman and O. Rees . . . by Taylor and Wilks . . . 1802. _Small 8vo,
mottled calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition. Frontispiece by Opie, engraved by Reynolds.


OPPIAN'S Halieuticks of the Nature of Fishes and Fishing of the Ancients
   In V. Books. Translated from the Greek, With an Account of Oppian's
Life and Writings, and a Catalogue of his Fishes. [engraving of the
Sheldonian Theatre] Oxford, Printed at the Theater, An. Dom. M DCC XXII.
_8vo, red straight-grain morocco, gilt fillets, gilt edges, by Larkins._

Translated by John Jones and John Diaper, of Baliol College, and
dedicated to the Lord Marquis of Carnarvon. On the verso of the
half-title is the Imprimatur, dated February 6, 1722.


ORBELIANI, SULKHAN-SABA.--The Book of Wisdom and Lies. [a Gregorian
Story-book of the eighteenth century, by Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani:
translated, with notes, by Oliver Wardrop. Printed by William Morris,
Kelmscott Press, 1894. Sold by Bernard Quaritch.] _Small 4to, vellum
wrappers, uncut edges._

Two hundred and fifty copies printed.


ORME, EDWARD.--An Essay on Transparent Prints, and on transparencies in
general. By Edward Orme. London: printed for, and Sold by, the Author,
. . . &c . . . 1807. . . . _Folio, half maroon straight-grain morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges._

French and English text: twenty plates, some in colours, seven
transparent.


ORPHEUS.--The Mystical Hymns of Orpheus. Translated from the Greek, and
demonstrated to be the Invocations which were used in the Eleusinian
Mysteries, by Thomas Taylor. . . . The Second Edition. With considerable
emendations, alterations, and additions. Chiswick: Printed by C.
Whittingham, . . . for the translator, . . . 1824. _Crown 8vo, half
green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


ORRERY, CHARLES BOYLE, EARL OF.--As You Find it. A comedy. As it is
Acted at the New-Theatre, in Little-Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, by Her
Majesty's Servants. . . . London: Printed for R. Parker, . . . M DC III.
[M DCC III.] . . . _4to, blue morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition of Boyle's only play. The date 1703 is misprinted 1603.

A2-A4 and B-K4 in fours. The Epilogue by George Granville is K3, "A
Catalogue of Books Printed" is K4.


ORRERY, JOHN BOYLE, EARL OF.--Remarks on the Life and Writings of Dr.
Jonathan Swift, Dean of St. Patrick's, Dublin, In a Series of Letters
from John Earl of Orrery To his Son, the Honourable Hamilton Boyle. . . .
London, Printed for A. Millar, . . . M DCC LII. _8vo, calf, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges._

Second edition, large paper copy. Etching of Swift by B. Wilson, 1751.


ORTHODOX COMMUNICANT.--See Sturt, John.


OSBURN, WILLIAM.--The Monumental History of Egypt, as recorded on the
ruins of her temples, palaces, and tombs. By William Osburn . . .
London: Truebner and Co., . . . MDCCCLIV. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

Thirty-nine plates and maps, some coloured.


O'SHAUGHNESSY, ARTHUR WILLIAM EDGAR.--An Epic of Women and other poems.
By Arthur W. E. O'Shaughnessy. London: John Camden Hotten, . . . 1870.
_Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


O'SHAUGHNESSY, ARTHUR WILLIAM EDGAR.--Lays of France, (founded on the
Lays of Marie) By Arthur W. E. O'Shaughnessy. London: Ellis and Green . . .
1872. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


O'SHAUGHNESSY, ARTHUR WILLIAM EDGAR.--Music and Moonlight. Poems and
Songs by Arthur O'Shaughnessy. London Chatto and Windus . . . 1874.
_Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


O'SHAUGHNESSY, ARTHUR WILLIAM EDGAR.--Songs of a Worker by Arthur
O'Shaughnessy. London Chatto and Windus . . . 1881. _Foolscap 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


OSSOLI, COUNTESS.--See Fuller, Margaret.


OTTLEY, HENRY.--A Biographical and Critical Dictionary of recent and
living Painters and Engravers, forming a Supplement to Bryan's
Dictionary of Painters and engravers as edited by George Stanley. By
Henry Ottley. London. Henry G. Bohn, . . . 1866. _Royal 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


OTTLEY, WILLIAM YOUNG.--An Inquiry into the Origin and Early History of
Engraving, upon Copper and in Wood, with an account of the engravers and
their works, from the Invention of Chalcography by Maso Finiguerra in
the time of Marc' Antonio Raimondi. By William Young Ottley . . .
London: printed for John and Arthur Arch . . . by J. M'Creery . . .
1816. _4to, two volumes, half red morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._

Numerous facsimile illustrations.


OTTLEY, WILLIAM YOUNG.--An Inquiry into the Origin and Early History of
Engraving. 1816. _Folio, two volumes, blue morocco, gilt back and sides,
gilt edges, by W. Strong._

Large paper copy, sixty printed, with the illustrations on India paper,
and many in duplicate, coloured.


OTTLEY, WILLIAM YOUNG.--A Collection of [100] Fac-Similes of Scarce and
Curious Prints, by the Early Masters of the Italian, German, and Flemish
Schools; illustrative of The History of Engraving, from the Invention of
the Art, by Maso Finiguerra, in the middle of the fifteenth century, to
the end of the century following: with an explanatory Catalogue of the
Plates. By William Young Ottley, . . . London: published for the
proprietor; and sold by Longman, &c . . . printed by J. M'Creery, . . .
1828. _Folio, half vellum, uncut edges._

One of the copies containing one hundred plates instead of one hundred
and twenty-nine. Some of the plates are on India paper, and Niello No. 4
is in duplicate, in silver. There is no frontispiece.


OTTLEY, WILLIAM YOUNG.--A Collection of One hundred and twenty-nine
Fac-Similes of Scarce and Curious Prints, by the Early Masters of the
Italian, German, and Flemish Schools; illustrative of the History of
Engraving, from the Invention of the Art, by Maso Finiguerra, in the
middle of the fifteenth century: with Introductory Remarks and a
Catalogue of the Plates. By William Young Ottley . . . London . . .
printed by J. M'Creery, . . . 1828. _Folio, blue morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt edges, by W. Strong._

The plates are on India paper, the Niellos in silver, and the
frontispiece coloured.


OUVAROFF, ALEXEI, COUNT.--Essay on the Mysteries of Eleusis; by M.
Ouvaroff, . . . Translated from the French, By J. D. Price. With
Observations, By J. Christie. London: printed for Rodwell and Martin, . . .
1817. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

Engraved frontispiece-title.


OVIDIUS.--Ovid's Metamorphoses epitomized in an English poetical style,
for the use and entertainment of the Ladies of Great Britain. [by the
Rev. Nicholas Tindal.]   London: Printed for Robert Horsfield, . . .
1760. _Small 8vo, old English red morocco, gilt back, thistle border on
the sides, gilt edges._

Presentation copy from Tindal to the Duchess of Richmond, with her
autograph and book-plate.


OWEN, HUGH.--See Champion and Owen.


OWENSON, SYDNEY.--See Morgan, Lady Sydney.


OXFORD ESSAYS.--The Oxford English Prize Essays . . . Oxford   D A
Talboys   1830. _Crown 8vo, four volumes, half green morocco, uncut
edges._

One of twelve copies printed on tinted paper.


PAGE, WILLIAM.--A Study of Shakespeare's Portraits, by William Page, . . .
London: printed at the Chiswick Press. MDCCCLXXVI. _18mo, cloth, uncut
edges._

Five illustrations. A reprint of an article in _Scribner's Magazine_ for
May, 1876.


PAINE, THOMAS.--Letter addressed to the Abbe Raynal on the Affairs of
North-America. In which The Mistakes in the Abbe's Account of the
Revolution of America are corrected and cleared up. By Thomas Paine, M.
A. of the University of Pennsylvania, and Author of the Pamphlet and
other Publications, entitled, "Common Sense." Philadelphia, Printed.
Boston: Re-Printed by Benjamin Edes & Sons, . . . M, DCC, LXXXII. _Crown
8vo, red levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.

The Postscript of four leaves is dated Philadelphia, August 21, 1782.


PAINE, THOMAS.--Common Sense; addressed to the Inhabitants of America,
on the following interesting subjects: I. Of the Origin and Design of
Government in general, with concise Remarks on the English
Constitution. II. Of Monarchy and Hereditary Succession. III.
Thoughts on the present State of American Affairs. IV. Of the
present ability of America, with some miscellaneous Reflections. A
new edition, with several Additions in the Body of the Work. To which
is added an Appendix; together with an Address to the People called
Quakers. By Thomas Paine, . . . [Two lines from Thomson.] Philadelphia:
Printed and Sold by W. and T. Bradford. M,DCC,XCI. _8vo, rose levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Inserted is a portrait by F. Bonneville.

The Introduction is dated Philadelphia, February 14, 1776.


PAINE, THOMAS.--Rights of Man: being an answer to Mr. Burke's attack on
the French Revolution. By Thomas Paine, . . . Fourth American edition.
Printed at Boston, by I. Thomas and E. T. Andrews, . . . MDCCXCI. _8vo,
green levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

Dedicated to George Washington.


PAINE, THOMAS.--Letter addressed to the Addressers, on the late
Proclamation. By Thomas Paine, . . . London: printed for H. D. Symonds,
. . . and Thomas Clio Rickman, . . . 1792. _8vo, maroon levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition. Contains final leaf of advertisement of "Rights of Man."


PAINE, THOMAS.--Letter addressed to the Addressers, on the
Proclamation. By Thomas Paine., . . . New York--printed by Thomas
Greenleaf.--M,DCC,XC,III. _8vo, blue levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

The half-title reads, "Paine's Rights of Man. Part third."


PAINE AND CONDORCET.--A Letter from M. Condorcet, a Member of the
National Convention, to a Magistrate in Swisserland, Respecting the
massacree of the Swiss Guards on the 10th of August, &c. With a
Letter from Thomas Paine, to the People of France, On his Election to
the National Convention. To which is added, an abstract Of that system
of despotism, which has been overturned by the French, and under which
the mass of the people in that country have groaned for ages. With a
brief account of the strength and resources of France. New York: printed
for the book-sellers. M, DCC, XCIII. _8vo, light brown levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


PAINE, THOMAS.--Prospects on the War, and Paper Currency. The first
American edition. By Thomas Paine, . . . Baltimore: printed by S. and J.
Adams, for Fisher and Cole, . . . M, DCC, XC, IV. _8vo, green levant
morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

The text is dated "York Street, St. James's Square, 20th August,
1787," and is followed by eleven pages of advertisements.


PAINE, THOMAS.--The Age of Reason. Being an investigation of true and of
fabulous theology. By Thomas Paine, citizen and cultivator of the United
States of America; . . . Paris, printed for Barrois, senior,
Bookseller, Quai des Augustins, N^{o}. 19. Second year of the French
Republic, one and indivisible. [1794] _8vo, brown levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.

The Dedication, "To my Fellow Citizens of the United States of America,"
is dated "Luxembourg, 8th Pluviose, Second Year of the French Republic,
one and indivisible. January 27, O. S. 1794."


PAINE, THOMAS.--The Age of Reason; being an investigation of true and
fabulous theology. By Thomas Paine, Secretary for Foreign Affairs to
Congress in the American War, . . . Paris: printed by Barrois. London:
Sold by D. I. Eaton, . . . 1794. Price one shilling and six-pence. _8vo,
half dark brown calf._

Second edition: with half-title, but without the Dedication.

Pasted in the back of the volume is a broadside on bluish grey paper,
"First and Second Day. Trial of Mr. R. Carlile, at the Court of King's
Bench. For Publishing Paynes' Age of Reason," two columns with
"Catnach, Printer, 2, Monmouth-court" at the end.


PAINE, THOMAS.--The Age of Reason. Part the second. Being an
investigation of true and of fabulous theology. By Thomas Paine, . . .
Printed for the author. M DCC XCV. _8vo, brown levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition of second part.

The Preface is dated October, 1795.


PAINE, THOMAS.--Dissertation on First-Principles of Government; By
Thomas Paine, . . . Paris, printed at the English press, Rue de
Vaugirard, N^{o}. 970. Third year of the French Republic. [1795] _8vo,
purple levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.

On pages 33-40 is "Speech of Thomas Paine, As delivered in the
Convention, July 7, 1795. wherein he alludes to the preceding Work," the
same speech that is appended to "The Decline and Fall of the English
System of Finance, Philadelphia, 1796," two items below.


PAINE, THOMAS.--Dissertation on First Principles of Government. By
Thomas Paine, . . . The second edition. London: Printed and Sold by
Daniel Isaac Eaton, . . . 1795. _8vo, green levant morocco, Janseniste,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


PAINE, THOMAS.--[First page] The Decline and Fall of the English System
of Finance. By Thomas Paine, . . . Philadelphia, printed by John Page,
. . . for Benj. Franklin Bache, . . . 1796. _8vo, brown levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

The half-title is followed by a leaf, A, containing the text of the
title, a quotation of one line, and nine lines of the Discourse, which
is dated at the end "Paris, 19th Germinal, 4th year of the Republic.
April 8, 1796." The text is A1-D5 (verso blank) in fours, pages 1-33.
Following is "Speech of Thomas Paine, As delivered in the Convention,
July 7, 1795. wherein he alludes to the preceding Work," C1-C4, pages
33-40. This is the same speech as that appended to "Dissertation on
First-Principles of Government," Paris, 1795. See page 260.


PAINE, THOMAS.--Agrarian Justice, opposed to Agrarian Law, and to
Agrarian Monopoly; being a plan for meliorating the condition of man, by
creating in every nation a national fund, To pay to every person, when
arrived at the age of twenty-one years, the sum of fifteen pounds
sterling, to enable him, or her to begin the world; and also, ten pounds
sterling per annum during life to every person now living of the age
of fifty years, and to all others when they shall arrive at that Age,
to enable them to live in old age without Wretchedness, and go
decently out of the World. By Thomas Paine, . . . Paris: Printed by W.
Adlard, . . . London, Reprinted for T. G. Ballard, . . . and Evans and
Bone, . . . 1797. _8vo, orange levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Written in the winter of 1795-96. Presumably the second edition.


PAINE, THOMAS.--Agrarian Justice, opposed to Agrarian Law, and to
Agrarian Monopoly. Being a plan for meliorating the condition of man, By
Creating in every Nation, a national fund, To Pay to every Person, when
arrived at the Age of Twenty-one Years, the Sum of Fifteen Pounds
Sterling, to enable him or her to begin the world! And also, Ten Pounds
Sterling per Annum during life to every Person now living of the Age of
Fifty Years, and to all others when they shall arrive at that Age, to
enable them to live in Old Age without Wretchedness, and go decently
out of the World. By Thomas Paine, . . . Philadelphia: printed by R.
Folwell, for Benjamin Franklin Bache. [1797] _8vo, brown levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Presumably the third edition.


PAINE, THOMAS.--A Letter to the Hon. Thomas Erskine, on the prosecution
of Thomas Williams, for publishing the Age of Reason. By Thomas Paine,
. . . with his Discourse at the society of the Theo-philanthropists.
Printed at Newburgh, by D. Denniston. [after 1797] _8vo, light blue
levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


PAINE, THOMAS.--The Ruling Passion: An occasional Poem. Written by the
appointment of the Society of the [Greek: Ph B K], and spoken, on their
anniversary, in the Chapel of the University, Cambridge, July 20,
1797. By Thomas Paine, A, M. Published according to Act of Congress.
Boston: Printed by Manning & Loring, for the Author. 1797. _4to, red
morocco, gilt fillets, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


PAINE, THOMAS.--Letters to the Citizens of the United States. By Thomas
Paine. New York: Printed in the year 1802. _8vo, maroon levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


PAINE, THOMAS.--Thomas Paine's Letter to the late General George
Washington. When President of the United States. Dated, Paris June 30,
1795. A new edition. New York: printed for and published by R. D.
Taylor. 1803. _8vo, orange levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


PAINE, THOMAS.--On the Origin of Free-masonry. By Thomas Paine.
Posthumous work. New York: printed and sold by Elliot and Crissy, . . .
1810. _8vo, light blue levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


PAINE, THOMAS.--Miscellaneous Poems. By Thomas Paine. London: printed &
published by R. Carlile, . . . 1819. _8vo, blue levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


PAINE, THOMAS.--See Puglia, James Ph. de. Vale, G. Wakefield, Gilbert.


PAINEIANA.--The Trial of Thomas Paine, for a libel, contained in the
second part of Rights of Man. Before Lord Kenyon, and a special jury, At
Guildhall, December 18, 1792. With the speeches of the Attorney General
and Mr. Erskine at large. Printed at Boston, by I. Thomas and E. T.
Andrews, . . . M DCC XC III. _8vo, orange levant morocco, Janseniste,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


PAINEIANA.--Mr. Thomas Paine's Trial; being an Examination of his Age of
Reason. To which is added, two Addresses, The First to the Deists, and
the Second to the Youths of America. With some Brief Remarks on Gilbert
Wakefield's Examination of said Age of Reason. Dedicated To George
Washington, President of the United States of America. By the Author of
the Dialogue between Philagathus and Pamela. . . . Printed at Boston, By
Isaiah Thomas and Ebenezer T. Andrews, . . . M D C C X C V. _12mo, red
levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


PAINEIANA.--A Dialogue on the approaching Trial of Mr. Carlile, for
publishing the Age of Reason. With the trial anticipated.

  Principal Speakers.
  Cantwell, a Member of the Society for the Suppression of Vice.
  Officio, Attorney General to the Holy League.
  Burn-all-o, a Member of the Holy Inquisition.
  Mordecai, an honest Israelite.
  Honestus, a sincere Christian.
  Candid, a Philosopher.

  Witnesses, &c.

From Wooler's British Gazette, Sunday, April 18, 1819. London: printed &
published by T. J. Wooler, . . . 1819. Price Fourpence. _8vo, maroon
levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


PALATINE ANTHOLOGY.--See Halliwell-Phillipps, J. O.


PALGRAVE, FRANCIS TURNER, _editor_.--The Golden Treasury of the best
songs and lyrical poems in the English Language selected and arranged
with notes by Francis Turner Palgrave. Cambridge Macmillan and Co., . . .
1862. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


PALLISER, FANNY MARRYAT.--History of Lace. By Mrs. [Richard] Bury
Palliser   London: Sampson Low, Son, & Marston 1865. _8vo, calf, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

One hundred and sixty-nine illustrations.


PALMER, ROUNDELL, _editor_.--The Book of Praise from the best English
hymn writers selected and arranged by Roundell Palmer [vignette by C. H.
Jeens after T. Woolner]   Macmillan and Co   London and Cambridge. 1864.
_8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


PALMERIN OF ENGLAND.--See Moraes, Francisco de.


PANAM, MADAME PAULINE.--Memoirs of a Young Greek Lady, Madame Pauline
Adelaide Alexandre Panam, against His Serene Highness the reigning
Prince of Saxe-Cobourg. Translated by W. H. Ireland, . . . London:
printed and published by J. Fairburn, . . . 1823. _8vo, red morocco,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Two portraits engraved by Phillips.


PARDOE, JULIA.--Louis the Fourteenth, and the Court of France in the
Seventeenth Century. By Miss Pardoe . . . Third edition, with an Index
now first added. London; Richard Bentley . . . MDCCCXLIX. _8vo, three
volumes, half blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Five steel portraits, fifty-one woodcut illustrations, also ninety-six
additional portraits, etc., inserted, many proofs on India paper, and
before letters, including some by Peter de Jode and St. Aubin.


PARDOE, JULIA.--The Court and Reign of Francis the First, King of
France. By Miss Pardoe. London: Richard Bentley MDCCCXLIX. _8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Portraits.


PARDOE, JULIA.--The Life of Marie de Medicis, Queen of France, consort
of Henry IV., and Regent of the Kingdom under Louis XIII. By Miss Pardoe
. . . London: Colburn and Co. . . . 1852. _8vo, three volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition. Three portraits and six facsimiles of letters.


PARK, THOMAS.--See Griffiths, A. F.


PARKER, JOHN HENRY.--A Glossary of Terms used in Grecian, Roman,
Italian, and Gothic Architecture. The fifth edition, enlarged.
Exemplified by seventeen hundred woodcuts   Oxford, John Henry Parker . . .
MDCCCL. _8vo, three volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges,
by Bedford._

Some of the illustrations are coloured.


PARKER, JOHN HENRY.--See Turner and Parker.


PARKER, MARTIN.--See Chap Books. 1817-1818.


PARNELL, THOMAS.--Poems on Several Occasions. Written by Dr. Thomas
Parnell, Late Arch-Deacon of Clogher: and Published by Mr. Pope . . .
London: Printed for B. Lintot, . . . 1722. _8vo, red levant morocco,
gilt back, rich side borders in the manner of Derome, gilt top, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. The Dedication, in verse, to Robert, Earl of Oxford, by
Pope, is dated Sept. 25, 1721, and is here printed for the first time.
The book concludes, beginning with N3, with "Visions, Publish'd in the
Spectators, &c. By the same Hand," and a final leaf of Index and
Advertisement.


PARNELL, THOMAS.--The Poetical Works of Thomas Parnell   London
William Pickering   1852. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Memoir by the Reverend John Mitford, and a portrait of Parnell.


PARNELL, THOMAS.--See Goldsmith and Parnell.


PARRY, WILLIAM.--The Last Days of Lord Byron: with his lordship's
opinions on various subjects, particularly on the state and prospects of
Greece. By William Parry . . . London: printed for Knight and Lacey, . . .
MDCCCXXV. _8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece representing Byron and his dog "Lyon."


PASCAL, BLAISE.--The Thoughts of Blaise Pascal translated from the text
of M. Auguste Molinier by C. Kegan Paul . . . London   Kegan Paul,
Trench & Co. [Chiswick Press] M DCCC LXXXV. _8vo, paper wrappers, uncut
edges._

No. 9 of fifty large paper copies printed, with portrait on Japan paper.


PATER, WALTER HORATIO.--Studies in the History of the Renaissance   by
Walter H. Pater . . . London   Macmillan and Co. 1873 . . . _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


PATER, WALTER HORATIO.--Marius the Epicurean his sensations and ideas
by Walter Pater . . . London: Macmillan and Co. 1885 . . . _Crown 8vo,
two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


PATER, WALTER HORATIO.--The Renaissance Studies in Art and Poetry   by
Walter Pater . . . Third edition, revised and enlarged   Macmillan and
Co. London and New York 1888. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Tinted frontispiece by Jeens.


PATER, WALTER HORATIO.--Appreciations with an Essay on   Style by Walter
Pater   London   Macmillan and Co. . . . 1889 . . . _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


PATER, WALTER HORATIO.--Plato and Platonism a Series of Lectures by
Walter Pater . . . London Macmillan and Co. . . . 1893 . . . _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


PATER, WALTER HORATIO.--Greek Studies a Series of Essays by Walter Pater
. . . prepared for the press by Charles L. Shadwell . . . London
Macmillan and Co. . . . 1895 . . . _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition, with portrait.


PATER, WALTER HORATIO.--[Half-title]   The Works of Walter Pater. London
   Macmillan and Co., . . . 1900 [-1901.] _8vo, nine volumes, original
cloth, uncut edges._

One of seven hundred and seventy-five copies printed, with frontispiece
in bistre on Japan paper.


PATER, WALTER HORATIO.--Essays from 'The Guardian' by Walter Pater . . .
London Macmillan and Co., . . . 1901. _8vo, original cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


PATERSON, WILLIAM.--Arminius. A Tragedy. As it was to have been Acted at
the Theatre-Royal in Drury-lane. London: Printed for, and sold by A.
Millar, . . . M. DCC. XL. . . . _8vo, olive morocco, Janseniste, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._


PATMORE, COVENTRY KERSEY DIGHTON.--Tamerton Church-Tower and other poems
by Coventry Patmore . . . London John W. Parker and Son . . . 1854.
_Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


PATMORE, COVENTRY.--The Angel in the House. The Betrothal . . . London
John W. Parker and Son . . . 1854. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


PATMORE, COVENTRY.--The Angel in the House. By Coventry Patmore. . . .
London and Cambridge, Macmillan and Co. 1863. . . . _Post 8vo, two
volumes (called "parts"), cloth, uncut edges._


PATMORE, COVENTRY.--Faithful for ever. By Coventry Patmore. . . .
London: John W. Parker, . . . 1860. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


PATMORE, COVENTRY, _editor_.--The Children's Garland   from the best
poets selected and arranged by Coventry Patmore [vignette] Macmillan and
Co. London and Cambridge   1862. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Vignette on the title-page by C. H. Jeens after T.
Woolner.


PATMORE, COVENTRY.--The Victories of Love. By Coventry Patmore. . . .
London and Cambridge: Macmillan and Co. 1863. . . . _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


PATMORE, HENRY.--Poems by Henry Patmore. Printed At Oxford by Henry
Daniel 1884. _4to, original covers, uncut edges._

One hundred and twenty-five copies printed.


PATMORE, PETER GEORGE.--My Friends and Acquaintance: being memorials,
mind-portraits, and personal recollections of Deceased Celebrities of
the nineteenth century: with Selections from their unpublished letters.
By P. G. Patmore, . . . London Saunders and Otley, . . . 1854. _Crown
8vo, three volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--Jokeby, a Burlesque on Rokeby, a poem . . . in
six cantos. By an Amateur, of Fashion To which are added, Occasional
Notes; by our most popular characters . . . Published by W. Wells and T.
B. Wait and Co. Boston . . . 1813. _18mo, half red levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--Letters from the South, written during an
excursion in the summer of 1816. By the author of John Bull and Brother
Jonathan, &c. &c. . . . New York: published by James Eastburn & Co. . . .
Abraham Paul, printer, 1817. _12mo, two volumes, half blue
straight-grain morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--The Backwoodsman. A Poem. By J. K. Paulding.
Philadelphia: published by M. Thomas . . . 1818. _12mo, original
boards, uncut edges._

First edition: with six preliminary leaves of advertisement. After page
176 are two stubs which complete signature Q and are evidently two
cancelled leaves.


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--The New Mirror for Travellers; and Guide to the
Springs. By an Amateur. New York: G. & C. Carvill . . . 1828. _12mo,
half cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--. . . The Dutchman's Fireside. A tale. By the
author of "Letters from the South" &c . . . New York: published by J. &
J. Harper, . . . 1831. _12mo, two volumes, green morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition. Contains the leaves of advertisement.


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--The Dutchman's Fireside. A Tale. By James K.
Paulding. "Somewhere about the time of the old French war." Edited by
William I. Paulding. New York: Charles Scribner and Company. 1868.
_12mo, half brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Matthews._


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--Westward Ho! a tale. By the author of "the
Dutchman's Fireside," . . . New York: printed and published by J. & J.
Harper . . . 1832. _12mo, two volumes, green morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges._

First edition.


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--The Book of Saint Nicholas. Translated from the
original Dutch of Dominic Nicholas AEgidius Oudenarde. New York: Harper &
Brothers, . . . 1836. _12mo, original cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. The dedication is dated Nieuw-Amsterdam, July, 1827.


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--Slavery in the United States. By J. K. Paulding.
New York: published by Harper & Brothers . . . 1836. _18mo, half cloth,
gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--The Old Continental; or, the Price of Liberty.
By the author of "The Dutchman's Fireside," &c., &c. . . . New York:
Paine and Burgess, . . . 1846. _12mo, two volumes in one, original
cloth._

First edition.


PAULDING, JAMES AND WILLIAM.--American Comedies. By J. K. Paulding, . . .
and William Irving Paulding.

  Contents.
  The Bucktails, or Americans in England.
    The Noble Exile.
  Madmen all, or the Cure of Love.
  Antipathies, or the Enthusiasts by the Ears.

Philadelphia: Carey and Hart. 1847. _8vo, red morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Of the four comedies, three are by J. K. Paulding.


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--The Puritan and his Daughter. By J. K. Paulding,
. . . New York, Baker and Scribner, . . . 1849. _8vo, two volumes in
one, cloth._

First edition.


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--Literary Life of James K. Paulding. Compiled by
his son William I. Paulding. New York: Charles Scribner and Company.
1867. _Crown 8vo, half brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Matthews._

First edition. Includes unpublished letters and hitherto uncollected
sketches.

Portrait by Halpin after Wood.


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--The Bulls and the Jonathans; comprising John
Bull and Brother Jonathan and John Bull in America. By James K.
Paulding. Edited by William I. Paulding. New York: Charles Scribner and
Company. 1867. _Crown 8vo, half brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Matthews._


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--Tales of the Good Woman. By a Doubtful
Gentleman: otherwise, James K. Paulding. Edited by William I. Paulding.
New York: Charles Scribner and Company. 1867. _Crown 8vo, half brown
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--A Book of Vagaries; comprising the New Mirror
for Travellers and other Whim-Whams: being selections from the papers of
a retired Common-Councilman erewhile known as Launcelot Langstaff, and,
in the public records, as James K. Paulding. Edited by William I.
Paulding. New York: Charles Scribner and Company. 1868. _Crown 8vo, half
brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._


PAULDING, JAMES KIRKE.--See Irving, Washington.


PAYN, JAMES.--Poems. By James Payn . . . Cambridge: Macmillan & Co.
1853. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


PAYNE, JOHN.--The Masque of Shadows and other poems by John Payne.
London Basil Montagu Pickering . . . 1870. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


PAYNE, JOHN.--Intaglios. Sonnets by John Payne . . . London Basil
Montagu Pickering . . . 1871. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


PAYNE, JOHN.--New Poems by John Payne London: Newman and Co . . . 1880.
_Crown 8vo, cloth._


PAYNE, JOHN, _translator_.--The Book of the Thousand Nights and One
Night: now first completely done into English prose and verse, from the
original Arabic, by John Payne . . . London: M DCCC LXXXII: printed for
the Villon Society by private subscription and for private circulation
only. _8vo, nine volumes, vellum boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 239 of five hundred large paper copies printed.


PAYNE, JOHN, _translator_.--Tales from the Arabic of the Breslau and
Calcutta (1814-18) editions of the Book of the Thousand Nights and One
Night not occurring in the other printed texts of the work, now first
done into English by John Payne. . . . London: M DCCC LXXXIV: printed
for the Villon Society by private subscription and for private
circulation only. _8vo, three volumes, vellum boards, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Large paper copy, No. 451.


PAYNE, JOHN, _translator_.--Alaeddin and the Enchanted Lamp; Zein Ul
Asnam and the King of the Jinn: two stories done into English from the
recently discovered Arabic text by John Payne. London: M DCCC LXXXIX:
printed for the Villon Society by private subscription and for private
circulation only. _Royal 8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back and sides,
gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Large paper copy, No. 32.


PAYNE, JOHN.--See Villon, Francois.


PAYNE AND FOSS, _editors_.--Bibliotheca Grenvilliana; or Bibliographical
Notices of rare and curious Books, forming part of the library of the
Right Hon. Thomas Grenville: by John Thomas Payne and Henry Foss. . . .
London: printed by William Nicol, Shakspeare Press, . . . 1842. [-1872]
_Imperial 8vo, four volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Bedford._

Large paper copy. Volume III, called "Part the Second printed by Order
of the Trustees," is dated 1848; Volume IV, "Part the Third," "printed
by Order of the Trustees," 1872, Chiswick Press, contains a bust
portrait of Grenville.


PAYNE, JOHN HOWARD.--Lispings of the Muse: a Selection from Juvenile
Poems, chiefly written at and before the age of sixteen, By John Howard
Payne . . . Printed as a testimony of regard from the author to his
personal friends (London: . . . Richard and Arthur Taylor . . .) 1815.
_8vo, blue levant morocco, Janseniste, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition.


PAYNE, JOHN HOWARD.--(I.) Therese the Orphan of Geneva, A Drama, in
three acts: freely translated from the French, altered and adapted to
the English Stage; By John Howard Payne New York: Published by Thomas
Longworth . . . W. Grattan, Printer. May, 1821. (II.) Accusation; or,
the Family of D'Anglade: a Melo Drama in three acts, from the French,
with alterations by John Howard Payne. Represented with great applause
at the Royal Drury-Lane and Boston Theatres. Boston: Published by West,
Richardson & Lord . . . and printed by J. H. A. Frost . . . 1818. _12mo,
two volumes in one, green levant morocco, gilt back and side panels,
edges entirely untrimmed, by Riviere._

First editions.


PEACOCK, THOMAS LOVE.--The Genius of the Thames: a lyrical poem, in two
parts. By Thomas Love Peacock.   London: printed for T. Hookham, Jun. &c
. . . 1810. _8vo, morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


PEACOCK, THOMAS LOVE.--Paper Money Lyrics, and other Poems. [Only 100
copies printed: not for sale.] London: printed by C. and W. Reynell . . .
1837. _Small 8vo, green morocco, gilt back, side corners, gilt edges,
by Bedford._

Manuscript additions and corrections by the author, and the original
covers preserved.


PEARCE, WILLIAM.--The Midnight Wanderers: a comic opera. In two acts.
Performed at the Theatre-Royal, Covent-Garden. Written by Mr. Pearce,
Author of Hartford Bridge. . . . London: printed for T. N. Longman, . . .
1793. _8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


PECKARD, PETER.--Memoirs of the Life of Mr. Nicholas Ferrar. By P.
Peckard . . . Cambridge, Printed by J. Archdeacon . . . MDCCXC. _8vo,
calf, gilt back, gilt edges._

First edition.

Portrait of Ferrar by Tomkins after Johnson.


[PELHAM, HENRY.]--An Ode on the Death of Mr. Pelham. . . . London,
Printed: And Sold by M. Cooper . . . M DCC LIV. . . . _Folio, cloth, by
The Club Bindery. Bound with two other works._


PELLATT, APSLEY.--Curiosities of Glass Making: with details of the
processes and productions of ancient and modern ornamental glass
manufacture. By Apsley Pellatt. London: David Bogue, . . . MDCCCXLIX.
_4to, original cloth, uncut edges._

Six coloured plates and numerous woodcut illustrations.


PEMBROKE, HENRY HERBERT, EARL OF.--A Method of Breaking Horses, and
teaching Soldiers to Ride, designed for the Use of the Army, by Henry
[Herbert] Earl of Pembroke . . . London: Printed by J. Hughs . . .
MDCC.LXI. _Small 8vo, contemporary green morocco, gilt back and sides,
gilt edges._

First edition. Plates.

From the collection of Lord George Lennox.


PENN, RICHARD.--Maxims and Hints on Angling, Chess, Shooting, and other
matters; also, Miseries of Fishing. With wood-cuts. By Richard Penn,
Esq., F.R.S. A new edition, enlarged. London: John Murray . . .
MDCCCXLII. _Small 8vo, green morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges,
by Wilson._

Twenty-five illustrations after the designs of Sir Francis Chantrey and
others.

Written by the great-grandson of William Penn.


PENNANT, THOMAS.--A Tour in Scotland, and Voyage to the Hebrides; M DCC
LXXII. [vignette] Chester, Printed by John Monk, M DCC LXXIV. _4to,
brown morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Engraved title and forty-four plates.


PENNELL, H. CHOLMONDELEY, _editor_.--Fishing Gossip or stray leaves from
the note-books of several anglers. Edited by H. Cholmondeley Pennell . . .
Edinburgh: Adam & Charles Black MDCCCLXVI. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

Frontispiece and other illustrations.


PENNELL, H. CHOLMONDELEY.--'From Grave to Gay' a volume of selections
from the complete poems of H. Cholmondeley-Pennell . . . London Longmans
. . . 1884. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Etched portrait of the author by Sherwin.


PENNELL, H. CHOLMONDELEY.--The Sporting Fish of Great Britain   with
notes on ichthyology   by H. Cholmondeley-Pennell . . . illustrated by
sixteen lithographs of fish in gold, silver, and colours. London
Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington . . . [Chiswick Press] 1886
. . . _Royal 8vo, half vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed.


PENNELL, JOSEPH.--Modern Illustration by Joseph Pennell, author of "Pen
Drawing and Pen Draughtsmen," etc. London: George Bell & Sons, [Chiswick
Press] . . . M dcccxcv. _8vo, maroon levant morocco, gilt back, centre
ornaments on the sides, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 120 of one hundred and twenty-five copies printed on Japanese
vellum.

Numerous illustrations after Whistler, Boutet de Monvel, Constable,
Bewick, Wilkie, Stothard, the Linnells, George Cruikshank, Dante Gabriel
Rossetti, and many others.


PERCY ANECDOTES.--The Percy Anecdotes. Original and select. By Sholto
and Reuben Percy . . . London: Printed for J. Cumberland . . . 1826.
_12mo, twenty volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Forty portraits engraved on steel.

Compiled by Thomas Byerley and Joseph Clinton Robertson.


PERCY SOCIETY. Early English Poetry, Ballads, and Popular Literature of
the Middle Ages. Edited from original manuscripts and scarce
publications. . . . London. Printed for the Percy Society, by T.
Richards, . . . M. DCCC. XL. _Crown 8vo, thirty volumes, half green
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


"PERCY, REUBEN."--See Byerley, Thomas.


PERCY, THOMAS, BISHOP, _translator_.--Five Pieces of Runic Poetry
Translated from the Islandic Language . . . London: Printed for R. and
J. Dodsley . . . MDCCLXIII. _8vo, sprinkled calf, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


PERCY, THOMAS, BISHOP.--The Life of Dr. Oliver Goldsmith: written from
Personal Knowledge, authentic Papers, and other indubitable
Authorities. To which are added, Such select Observations, from
various Parts of this Writer's Works, as may tend to recreate the Fancy,
improve the Understanding, and amend the Heart. [Six lines in English]
London: Printed for J. Swan, . . . 1774. . . . _8vo, green levant
morocco, gilt fillets, uncut edges, by Leighton._

First edition.


PERKINS, CHARLES C.--Tuscan Sculptors: their lives, works, and times.
With illustrations [45 etchings and 28 woodcuts] from original drawings
and photographs. By Charles C. Perkins. . . . London: Longman, Green,
Longman, Roberts, & Green. 1864. _Royal 4to, two volumes, cloth, gilt
top, uncut edges._


PERKINS, CHARLES C.--Italian Sculptors: being a History of Sculpture in
northern, southern, and eastern Italy. By Charles C. Perkins. . . . With
[29] etchings by the author, and [7] engravings on wood from original
drawings and photographs. London: Longmans, Green, and Co. 1868. _Royal
8vo, half light brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


PERRAULT, CHARLES.--Tales of Passed Times by Mother Goose. With Morals.
Written In French by M. Perrault, And Englished by R. S. Gent. To which
is added a New one, viz. The Discreet Princess. The Six Edition,
Corrected, and adorned with fine Cuts. London: Printed for J. Melvil, . . .
M DCC LXIV. _Small 8vo, purple calf, blind tooled, by Clyde._

Large paper copy, with nine copper-plate engravings.

The text is in English and French, on opposite pages.


PETERS, SAMUEL A.--A General History of Connecticut, from its First
Settlement under George Fenwick, Esq. to its Latest Period of Amity with
Great Britain; including a description of the country, And many curious
and interesting Anecdotes. To which is added, An Appendix, wherein new
and the true Sources of the present Rebellion in America are pointed
out; together with the particular Part taken by the People of
Connecticut in its Promotion. By a Gentleman of the Province . . .
London: Printed for the Author; And sold by J. Bew, . . . MDCCLXXXI.
_8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, inside border, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

Large paper copy of the first edition.


PETRARCH.--Fifteen Sonnets of Petrarch selected and translated by Thomas
Wentworth Higginson   Published by Houghton Mifflin & Company Boston and
New York M DCCCC III. _16mo, half vellum, uncut edges._

No. 95 of four hundred and thirty large paper copies printed, with
woodcut title-page printed in red ink.


PETRONIUS ARBITER.--See Propertius.


PFOUNDES, C.--Fu-so Mimi Bukuro. A Budget of Japanese Notes, by C.
Pfoundes. Reprinted from the "Japan Mail." 1875. Printed and Published
at the "Japan Mail" Office, Yokohama, Japan. _Crown 8vo, cloth._

Presentation copy from the author.


PHILIPS, AMBROSE.--The Distrest Mother. A Tragedy. As it is Acted at
the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. By Her Majesty's Servants. Written by
Mr. Philips. London: Printed for S. Buckley . . . and J. Tonson, . . .
M DCC XII. _4to, dark brown calf, gilt edges._

First edition. A1-A4, a1-a2, and B-I2 in fours, half-title on A1, title
on A2.

A translation of Racine's "Andromaque." Dedication to the Duchess of
Montague, Prologue by Steele, Epilogue nominally by Budgell, but
actually by Addison.


PHILLIPS, CLAUDE.--Sir Joshua Reynolds by Claude Phillips   With Nine
Illustrations from Pictures by the Master . . . London   Seeley and Co.
. . . 1894. _Royal 8vo, half morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


PHILLIPS, HENRY.--The True Enjoyment of Angling. By Henry Phillips Esq.
. . . London: printed by William Stevens . . . 1843. _Royal 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

Subscriber's copy, one hundred printed.

Mezzotint portrait, proof, by Dawe after Knight.


PHILLIPS, JOHN.--The Splendid Shilling. A Poem, In Imitation of Milton.
By the Author of Bleinheim. [John Phillips, of Christ Church, Oxford] . . .
London: Printed, and Sold by B. Bragg, . . . 1705. _Folio, silk
covers, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. A1-A4.


PHILLIPS, JOHN.--Cyder. A Poem. In two books . . . London: Printed for
Jacob Tonson, . . . 1708. _8vo, original calf, gilt back, with Bunbury
crest in the top panel._

First edition, on large paper, with frontispiece by M. Van der Gucht.


PHILLIPS, STEPHEN.--Herod a tragedy by Stephen Phillips John Lane London
and New York 1901. _Post 8vo, green cloth, uncut edges._


PHILLIPS, STEPHEN.--Ulysses a drama in a prologue & three acts by
Stephen Phillips. John Lane London and New York 1902. _Post 8vo, green
cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


PHILLIPS, STEPHEN.--Ulysses a drama in a prologue & three acts by
Stephen Phillips   New York   The Macmillan Company . . . 1902 . . .
_8vo, original vellum covers, uncut edges._

No. 31 of one hundred large paper copies printed on Japanese vellum.


PHILLIPS, STEPHEN.--The Sin of David by Stephen Phillips   London
Macmillan and Co. . . . 1904. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


PHILLIPS, STEPHEN.--The Sin of David by Stephen Phillips . . . New York
   The Macmillan Company . . . 1904. _12mo, vellum boards, uncut edges._

No. 56 of one hundred large paper copies printed on Japanese vellum.


PHILOBIBLON SOCIETY. Bibliographical and Historical Miscellanies.
London: printed by Charles Whittingham. 1854. [-1876] _4to, fourteen
volumes, brown levant morocco, doubled with russia, russia guards, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

One of twenty-five copies printed on wove paper.


PHIPPEN, FRANCIS.--See Hone, William. 1830.


PICKERING, WILLIAM.--Rules and Regulations of the Walton and Cotton
Club. Instituted 19^{th} March 1817   Revised 8^{th} April 1840 &c.
London 1840. _Small 4to, green morocco, lavishly decorated with Waltonian
emblems, inlaid with variegated leathers, covered with tooling, broad
inside borders, inlaid and gilded, watered silk linings, gilt edges, by
Hayday, and one of his most elaborate examples._

Cuts of fish, etc., and coloured borders. Privately printed, and a very
few copies issued by William Pickering. This copy was a present to "J.
W. K. Eyton, Esq. from the author, Aug. 7. 1840."


PILKINGTON AND FUSELI.--(I.) A Dictionary of Painters, from the revival
of the art to the present period; by the Rev. M.[atthew] Pilkington,
A.M. A new edition, with considerable alterations, additions, an
appendix, and an index, by Henry Fuseli, R. A. . . . London: printed by
John Crowder, . . . for J. Johnson &c . . . 1805. (II.) An Illustrative
Supplement to Pilkington's Dictionary of Painters; consisting of
biographical sketches, and one hundred and thirty-nine portraits;
principally taken from the Anecdotes of Painting, &c. by Horatio
Walpole, Earl of Orford. London: printed for John Stockdale, . . . 1805.
_4to, two works in one volume, calf, gilt back, side borders._

Frontispiece-portrait of Fuseli by T. Holloway after T. Lawrence.
Seventy-four portraits on fifty-six plates in the first work, and
sixty-three portraits on fifty-five plates in the second.


PILKINGTON AND FUSELI.--A Dictionary of Painters. 1805. _4to, five
volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Another copy, illustrated by the insertion of seven hundred and
seventy-six engravings, comprising portraits of the artists and examples
of their work. Fully a third of the plates are in proof condition, one
hundred and thirty being on India paper, and they include fine examples
of engraving by Duerer, Goltzius, Hollar, Faithorne, Bartolozzi, Crispin
de Pass, Edelinck, etc.


PINDAR.--Odes of Pindar, With several other Pieces in Prose and Verse,
Translated from the Greek. To which is added a Dissertation on the
Olympick Games; together with Original Poems on several Occasions. By
Gilbert West . . . London: Printed for J. Dodsley . . . MDCCLXVI. _12mo,
three volumes, citron morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

Presentation copy from the Princess Charlotte to her sister Elizabeth,
with a sonnet in her autograph. Portrait of Pindar engraved by Boitard.


PLANCHE, J. R.--See Cunningham, Planche and Collier.


PLAY-BILLS.--1765-1785. _Folio, two volumes, cloth._

One hundred and fifty-nine play-bills, of which twenty-one are
duplicates. Volume I contains eighty-three bills of the Drury-Lane
Theatre, from March 11, 1765--September 6, 1769, with a few undated and
one of February 23, 1785. The seventy-six in Volume II are principally
of the Theatre Royal in Liverpool, and extend from September 9,
1772--September 24, 1785, with a few undated.


PLOMER, HENRY R.--Abstracts from the Wills of English Printers &
Stationers, from 1492 to 1630. By Henry R. Plomer. London: printed for
the Bibliographical Society, By Blades, East & Blades. February, 1903.
_4to, original paper covers, uncut edges._


PLOMER, HENRY R.--See Duff, E. Gordon.


PLUTARCH.--Plutarch's Lives. Translated from the Original Greek; with
notes, critical and historical; and a new Life of Plutarch. By J.
Langhorne, D. D. and W. Langhorne, M. A. . . . London: printed for J.
Richardson and Co. &c . . . 1821. _12mo, eight volumes, half green
levant morocco, uncut edges._

Inserted are over fifty plates, by Van der Gucht, Du Guernier, and Giles
King after Cheron and Van der Gucht.


POCKET BOOK.--A little pretty Pocket-book, Intended for the Instruction
and Amusement of Little Master Tommy, and Pretty Miss Polly. With Two
Letters from Jack the Giant-Killer; as also a Ball and Pincushion; The
Use of which will infallibly make Tommy a good Boy, and Polly a good
Girl. To which is added, a little song-book, being A New Attempt to
teach Children the Use of the English Alphabet, by Way of
Diversion. The first Worcester edition. Printed at Worcester,
Massachusetts. By Isaiah Thomas, And sold, Wholesale and Retail,
at his Book-Store. M DCC LXXXVII. _16mo, green levant morocco, gilt
back, side compartments in gilt and mosaic of red morocco, doubled with
green morocco, gilt borders, red silk guards, gilt top, uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery._

Woodcut frontispiece, "Instruction with Delight," and sixty-five cuts in
the text.

The present copy contains the leaf of advertisement, H6, and the two
final blank leaves, H7 and H8.

Dedicated by the Editor to the Parents, Guardians, and Nurses in the
United States of America.


POCKET DIARY. XVIII^{th} Century. _12mo, old English red morocco, gilt
back, sides covered with conventional floral ornaments and insects,
silver bosses, gilt edges, with pencil and sheath._


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket.
Comprising the details of a mutiny and atrocious butchery on board the
American Brig Grampus, on her way to the South Seas, in the month of
June, 1827. With an account of the recapture of the vessel by the
survivers; their shipwreck and subsequent horrible sufferings from
famine; their deliverance by means of the British Schooner Jane Guy; the
brief cruise of this latter vessel in the Antarctic Ocean; her capture
and the massacre of her crew among a group of islands in the
eighty-fourth parallel of southern latitude; together with the
incredible adventures and discoveries still farther south to which that
distressing calamity gave rise   New York: Harper & Brothers . . . 1838.
_12mo, half blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Stikeman._

First edition.


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--Aventures d'Arthur Gordon Pym. Eureka par Edgar Poe.
Traduction de Charles Baudelaire. Paris, Michel Levy, freres . . . 1870.
_12mo, half red morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


POE, EDGAR ALLAN, _editor_.--The Conchologist's First Book: or, a System
of Testaceous Malacology, Arranged expressly for the use of Schools, in
which the animals, according to Cuvier, are given with the shells, a
great number of new species added, and the whole brought up, as
accurately as possible, to the present condition of the science. By
Edgar A. Poe. With illustrations of two hundred and fifteen shells,
presenting a correct type of each genus. [12 plates] Philadelphia:
published for the author, by Haswell, Barrington, and Haswell, . . .
1839. _16mo, half brown morocco._

A compilation from various English sources.


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--Tales by Edgar A. Poe New York: Wiley and Putnam, . . .
1845. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

First edition.


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--Histoires Extraordinaires par Edgar Poe. Traduction
par Charles Baudelaire. Paris, Michel Levy, freres . . . 1869. _12mo,
half red morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--Nouvelles Histoires Extraordinaires par Edgar Poe.
Traduction de Charles Baudelaire. Paris, Michel Levy, freres . . . 1869.
_12mo, half red morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--Edgar Poe. Histoires Extraordinaires, traduites par
Charles Baudelaire. Edition illustree de treize gravures hors texte.
Paris, A. Quantin . . . 1884. _8vo, brown levant morocco, Janseniste,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

No. 25 of one hundred copies printed on Japan paper, with the original
covers, and two states of the portrait by Chifflart and etchings by
Wogel, on Holland and Japan paper, the latter proofs before letters.


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--Charles Baudelaire. Quinze Histoires d'Edgar Poe
Illustrations de Louis Legrand. Paris imprime pour les Amis des Livres
. . . 1897. _Royal 8vo, brown levant morocco, filleted back and side
borders, gilt over uncut edges, with the original covers bound in, by
Chambolle-Duru._

No. 61 of fifty copies printed with the large illustrations in two
states.


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--The Raven and other poems. By Edgar A. Poe. London:
Wiley & Putnam, . . . 1846. _12mo, original cloth, uncut edges._

The first edition with the London imprint.


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--The Raven and other poems. By Edgar A. Poe. New York:
Wiley and Putnam, . . . 1845. _8vo, boards, uncut edges, in a red levant
morocco case._

First American edition.


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--(I.-II.) The Works of the late Edgar Allan Poe: with
notices of his life and genius. By N. P. Willis, J. R. Lowell, and R. W.
Griswold . . . [Portrait] New York: J. S. Redfield . . . 1850.

(III.) The Literati: some honest opinions about autorial merits and
demerits, with Occasional Words of Personality. Together with
marginalia, suggestions, and essays. By Edgar A. Poe . . . with a sketch
of the author by Rufus Wilmot Griswold. New York: J. S. Redfield . . .
1850.

(IV.) The Works of the late Edgar Allan Poe with a Memoir by Rufus
Wilmot Griswold and notices of his life and genius by N. P. Willis and
J. R. Lowell. Redfield . . . New York. 1856. _12mo, four volumes, half
blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--The Poetical Works of Edgar Allan Poe with A Notice
of his Life and Genius   By James Hannay, . . . With twenty
illustrations   by E. H. Wehnert, James Godwin, F. W. Hulme, and
Harrison Weir. London: Addey and Co. . . . M DCCC LIII. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--The Poems of Edgar Allan Poe with an essay on his
poetry by Andrew Lang. London Kegan Paul, Trench & Co., . . .
MDCCCLXXXI. _Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with frontispiece on India paper.


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--Tamerlane and other poems by Edgar Allan Poe first
published at Boston in 1827 and now first republished from a unique copy
of the original edition with a preface by Richard Herne Shepherd London
   George Redway   M DCCC LXXXIV. _16mo, vellum boards, uncut edges._

No. 35 of one hundred copies printed.


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--The Works of Edgar Allan Poe with a Memoir by Richard
Henry Stoddard . . . [etching] New York   George P. Putnam's Sons . . .
[n. d.] _Square 8vo, eight volumes, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait, seven etched frontispieces, and vignettes on the title-pages.
Three hundred and fifteen copies printed.


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--Les Cloches poeme de Edgar Poe traduction libre
d'Emile Blemont avec quatre eaux-fortes de Henry Guerard   Paris
Librairie de l'Eau-forte . . . _4to, original paper covers, uncut
edges._

One hundred Holland paper copies printed, with etchings on Japan paper.


POE, EDGAR ALLEN.--Some Letters of Edgar Allan Poe to E. H. N. Patterson
of Oquawka, Illinois, with Comments by Eugene Field   Chicago   the
Caxton Club 1898. _4to, buckram, uncut edges._

One hundred and eighty-six copies printed on American hand-made paper.


POE, EDGAR ALLAN.--See Leslie, Eliza. The Gift. Lowell, J. R. The
Pioneer. Stedman, E. C.


POEMS.--A Collection of Poems in six volumes. By several hands.
[vignette] London: Printed by J. Hughs, For R. and J. Dodsley, . . . M
DCC LVIII. _Small 8vo, six volumes, sprinkled calf._

Fifth edition, except of Volume IV, which is second, according to the
half-title. Vignettes, and in Volume III a plate, by Grignion after
Hayman.

Some of the authors represented here, besides many comparatively
unknown, are Dr. Johnson, Shenstone, Lord Lansdown, Gray, Pope, Thomson,
William Collins, Waller, Somerville, Fielding, Akenside, Lord Lyttelton,
and Joseph Warton.


POETICAL ADDRESS.--A Poetical Address to the Fashionable Ladies of
Great Britain. . . . London: printed for the author by T. Bensley; . . .
M DCC LXXX VIII. _4to, paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._


POETICAL MISCELLANIES.--See Steele, Sir Richard.


POETRY.--Bell's Classical Arrangement of Fugitive Poetry . . . London:
Printed by John Bell . . . MDCCXC-1797. _Foolscap 8vo, eighteen volumes
in nine, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Rousselle._

Frontispieces by Delatre after Burney, etc.

Large paper copy.


POETRY.--Inedited Poetical Miscellanies   1584-1700. Selected from MSS.
chiefly in private hands, with a few explanatory and illustrative notes.
Printed [at the Chiswick Press] for private circulation. 1870. _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

Fifty copies printed for Henry Huth and edited by W. Carew Hazlitt. The
present copy has the Amatory Poems, thirty-two pages, of which but three
copies were printed. Two autograph letters inserted, from the editor,
verify this detail.


POETS.--One hundred and seventeen illustrations to the English Poets,
including seven portraits. London: Sharpe 1804-'6. _Royal 8vo, two
volumes, russia, gilt back and sides, gilt edges._

One of six copies on India paper, proofs before letters.


POET'S GIFT.--See Keese, John.


POETS OF AMERICA.--See Keese, John.


POLE, WILLIAM.--See Jeaffreson, J. C.


POLHEMUS, JOHN.--A Family Souvenir. My First Vacation and Welcome home,
with a brief biographical sketch [by John Polhemus]. New York: John
Polhemus Printing Company. 1891. _4to, half cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of the author and his presentation inscription.


POLLARD, ALFRED WILLIAM.--Last Words on the History of the Title-page
with Notes on some colophons and twenty-seven fac-similes of title-pages
by Alfred W. Pollard. [woodcut] London: John C. Nimmo. . . . M DCCC XCI.
_4to, buckram, uncut edges._

No. 27 of two hundred and sixty copies printed.


POLLARD, ALFRED WILLIAM.--Early Illustrated Books   A History of the
Decoration and Illustration of Books in the 15th and 16th Centuries By
Alfred W. Pollard. London Kegan Paul, Trench, Truebner & Co., . . . M
DCCC XC III. _8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

No. 18 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed: with woodcut
title, frontispiece on Japan paper, and fifty-eight other facsimiles.


POLLOK, ROBERT.--The Course of Time: a poem, in ten books. By Robert
Pollok, . . . William Blackwood, Edinburgh: and T. Cadell, London,
MDCCCXXVII. _12mo, two volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Portrait of the author, engraved by T. A. Dean, proof on
India paper, inserted.


POMET, PIERRE.--A Compleat History of Druggs, Written in French by
Monsieur Pomet, Chief Druggist to the present French King; to which is
added what is further observable on the same Subject, from Mess^{rs}.
Lemery, and Tournefort, Divided into Three Classes, Vegetable, Animal
and Mineral; With their Use In Physick, Chymistry, Pharmacy, And several
other Arts: illustrated   With above Four Hundred Copper Cutts curiously
done from the Life; and an Explanation of their different Names, Places
of Growth, and Countries from whence they are brought; the Way to know
the True from the False, their Virtues, &c. A Work of very great Use and
Curiosity. Done into English from the Originals. London: Printed for R.
Bonwicke, . . . 1712. _4to, brown levant morocco, gilt back, side
panels, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

The "cutts" are on eighty-five plates.


POOLE, JOHN.--The Comic Miscellany. By John Poole . . . with a portrait
of the author and an illustration by Phiz. London: William Tegg and Co.,
. . . 1851. _12mo, cloth, uncut edges._


POOLE, REGINALD STUART.--Horae AEgyptiacae: or, the Chronology of Ancient
Egypt discovered from astronomical and hieroglyphic records upon its
monuments; including many dates found in coeval inscriptions from the
period of the building of the great pyramid to the times of the
Persians: and illustrations of the history of the first nineteen
dynasties, shewing the order of their succession, from the monuments. By
Reginald Stuart Poole. With [7] plates and numerous cuts. London: John
Murray, . . . 1851. _8vo, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by R. W. Smith._


POPE, ALEXANDER.--An Essay on Criticism.

  . . . Si quid novisti rectius istis,
  Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.

              HORAT.

London: Printed for W. Lewis in Russel-Street, Covent-Garden; And Sold
by W. Taylor at the Ship in Pater-Noster-Row, T. Osborn in Grays-Inn
near the Walks, and J. Graves in St. James's-Street. M DCC XI. _4to,
half morocco, red edges._

First edition. A-F2 in fours, title on A1.


POPE, GAY, AND OTHERS.--Miscellaneous Poems and Translations. By several
hands . . . London: Printed for Bernard Lintott . . . 1712. _8vo, blue
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Frontispiece engraved by Kirk.

Contributions by Pope, Dryden, Gay, Prior, Brome, etc., concluding with
"The Rape of the Locke," the first appearance of the poem.

The book is complete, although there are no pages 321-352.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dying Christian to his Soul an Ode, written By M^{r}
Pope, Adapted for three Voices, and the Piano Forte. London Printed &
Sold, by Preston, . . . [n. d.] _4to, green figured silk, by The Club
Bindery._

Three pages of music score.

This poem was written in [1712], appeared in its original form in
Lewis's Miscellany in 1730, was altered the same year, and appeared in
its present form in 1736, 8vo. Pope never avowed its authorship.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--Windsor-Forest. To the Right Honourable George Lord
Lansdown. By Mr. Pope. [Three lines from Virgil.] London: Printed for
Bernard Lintott at the Cross-Keys in Fleet-street. 1713. _Folio, red
levant morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.

Collation: Title with ornament, A1 (verso blank). Text, A2-E2, in twos.
Pages 1-18.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Rape of the Lock. an heroi-comical Poem. In Five
Canto's. Written by Mr. Pope.--A tonso est hoc nomen adepta
capillo. Ovid. London: Printed for Bernard Lintott, at the Cross-Keys
in Fleetstreet. 1714. _8vo, original covers, uncut, in silk chemise,
and green levant morocco case._

First separate edition, and the earliest to contain the machinery of the
Sylphs. Frontispiece and five plates by Du Bosc after Du Guernier.

Collation: Title in red and black, A1 (verso blank). Dedication to Mrs.
Arabella Fermor, A2-A4 (verso blank). Text, B1-D8, in eights. Pages
1-48; 29 misprinted, 26 and 44 and 45 reversed.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Rape of the Lock. 1714. _8vo, red levant morocco,
back and sides elaborately tooled in compartments of mosaic in ivory,
dark, and light green morocco, doubled with red morocco, gilt borders,
gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy, printed upon thick paper.

Collation: The same as the preceding copy.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Rape of the Lock. an heroi-comical Poem. In Five
Canto's. Written by Mr. Pope.--A tonso est hoc nomen adepta capillo.
Ovid. The Second Edition. London: Printed for Bernard Lintott, at the
Cross-Keys in Fleet-street. 1714. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Frontispiece and five plates engraved by Du Bosc after Du Guernier.

Collation: The same as the first edition, but with no errors in
pagination.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Rape of the Lock, an Heroi-Comical Poem, by A.
Pope. Adorned with plates. London: Printed by C. Bensley; for F. J.
DuRoveray . . . 1798. _Royal 8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back and side
panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Large paper copy. In addition to the plates by Bartolozzi, fourteen
others have been inserted, including an India proof portrait of Pope,
engraved by C. Warren, and other proof illustrations, some in two
states.

Collation: Half-title, a1 (verso blank). Title, a2 (verso blank).
Advertisement, a3-a8. Poem by T. Parnell to Pope, b1-b4 (verso blank).
Dedication to Mrs. Arabella Fermor, b5-b7 (verso blank). Pages i-xxix.
Text, B1-E8, in eights, B1, B7, C5, D4, and E3 being half-titles, with
versos blank. "Notes, Variations, and Imitations," F1 (verso blank)-F8
(verso blank). Pages 1-79.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Rape of the Lock an heroi-comical poem in five
cantos written by Alexander Pope embroidered with nine drawings [on
Japan paper] by Aubrey Beardsley . . . London Leonard Smithers [Chiswick
Press] . . . M DCCC XC VI. _4to, decorated cloth, uncut edges._


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Iliad of Homer. Translated by Mr. Pope. [Four
lines from Lucretius] London: Printed by W. Bowyer, for Bernard Lintott
between the Temple-Gates, 1715 [-1720.] _Folio, six volumes, pigskin,
gilt and blind-tooled back and sides, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Large paper copy of the original subscription edition. Bust portrait by
Vertue, map of Greece and Phrygia by John Senex, plan of Troy and
environs by L. Harris, and vignettes preceding each book.

Volume II is dated 1716; III, 1717; IV, 1718, V and VI, 1720.


POPE, ALEXANDER, _translator_.--The Iliad of Homer, translated by A.
Pope. London: Printed for F. J. DuRoveray, By T. Bensley . . . 1805.
_Royal 8vo, six volumes in three, red levant morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Largest paper copy. Illustrated by the portrait and twenty-four plates
(each in three states) by Schiavonetti, Heath, Isaac Taylor, etc., after
Stothard, Westall, Singleton, etc., and in addition two portraits,
twenty-six plates, proofs before the letters, after Marillier,
twenty-six other scenes to the Iliad (six on India paper), Bartolozzi's
engraving of Jupiter, and the Parting of Hector and Andromache, coloured
like a miniature.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Works of Mr. Alexander Pope. [Four lines from
Cicero pro Arch. and a large floral woodcut] London: Printed by W.
Bowyer, for Bernard Lintot between the Temple-Gates. 1717. _Small folio,
brown levant morocco, side borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First collected folio edition of the Miscellaneous Poems, in which the
"Elegy to the Memory of an Unfortunate Lady" and "Eloisa to Abelard"
appear for the first time. The half-title, T1, is in duplicate.

Collation: Half-title, one leaf (verso blank). Title with a large floral
woodcut, one leaf (verso blank). Preface, a1-c1 (verso blank), in twos.
Commendatory poems to the Author by the Duke of Buckingham, the Countess
of Winchelsea, Wycherley, Fr. Knapp, E. Fenton, Parnell, and Simon
Harcourt, c2-g1 (verso blank). Table, g2. Half-title of Pastorals, B1
(verso blank). "A Discourse on Pastoral Poetry," B2-D1. Pastorals,
D2-M2. Half-title of "Windsor Forest," N1 (verso blank). Text, N2-S2
(verso blank). Half-title of "Essay on Criticism," written 1709, T1
(verso blank). [Duplicate leaf] Text, T2-Z2 and Aa1-Ee2 (verso blank).
Half-title of "The Rape of the Lock," written 1712, Ff1 (verso blank).
Dedication to Mrs. Arabella Fermor, Ff2-Gg1 (verso blank). Text, Gg2-Rr2
(verso blank). Half-title of "The Temple of Fame," written 1711, Ss1
(verso blank). Advertisement, Ss2 (verso blank). Text, Tt1-Zz2 and
Aaa1-Bbb1 (verso blank). Half-title, "January and May," Bbb2 (verso
blank). Text, Ccc1-Mmm2 (verso blank). Half-title of "The Wife of Bath
her Prologue," Nnn1 (verso blank). Text, Nnn2-Sss2 (verso blank).
Half-title, "Sapho to Phaon," Ttt1 (verso blank). Text, Ttt2-Yyy2 recto.
Vertumnus and Pomona, Yyy2 verso-Aaaa1. The Fable of Dryope,
Aaaa2-Bbbb2. Half-title, "The First Book of Statius his Thebais," Cccc1
(verso Argument). Text, Ccccz-Nnnn2 (verso blank). Half-title, "Part of
the Thirteenth Book of Homer's Odysses," Oooo1 (verso blank). Text,
Oooo2-Ssss1 (verso blank). Half-title, "Miscellanies on Several
Occasions," Ssss2 (verso blank). Poems, Tttt1-Fffff2 (verso blank).
Half-title, "Eloisa to Abelard," Ggggg1 (verso Argument). Text,
Ggggg2-Lllll2. Pages 1-408.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Works of Mr. Alexander Pope. [Four lines from
Cicero pro Arch, and a triangular engraved vignette] London: Printed by
W. Bowyer, for Bernard Lintot between the Temple-Gates. 1717. _Folio,
red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Another issue of the first edition, on large and thick paper, measuring
14-1/4 by 9-1/4 inches. The text is partly reset and partly printed from
the same types, with title-page in red and black, different ornaments,
vignettes and initials engraved by Gribelin, and a portrait by Vertue
after Jervas, which was issued separately in 1715.

Collation: The same as the preceding issue, without the duplicate
half-title, T1.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Works of Alexander Pope Esq. In Nine Volumes
Complete. With his last corrections, additions, and improvements; As
they were delivered to the Editor a little before his Death: together
with the Commentaries and Notes of Mr. Warburton [afterwards Bishop of
Gloucester]   London, Printed for J. and P. Knapton, H. Lintot, J. and
R. Tonson, and S. Draper. M DCC LI. _8vo, nine volumes, Spanish calf,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Thick paper copy of Warburton's first edition: with twenty-four
engravings by Major after the designs of Blakey, Wale, and Hayman. The
frontispiece of Volume I contains medallion portraits of Pope and
Warburton.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--(I.) The Works of Alexander Pope Esq. In Nine
Volumes, Complete. With his last corrections, additions, and
improvements; As they were delivered to the Editor, a little before his
Death. Together with the commentary and notes of Mr. Warburton. London,
Printed for A. Millar, J. and R. Tonson, H. Lintot, and C. Bathurst. M
DCC LVII. _8vo, nine volumes, sprinkled calf, gilt back, citron edges._

Twenty-four plates and inserted portrait by Vertue.

Warburton's sixth edition. Volume II contains Translations and
Imitations; III, Moral Essays; IV, Satires, etc.; V, The Dunciad; VI,
Miscellaneous pieces in verse and prose: VII-IX, Letters.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Works of Alexander Pope Esq . . . Complete. with
his last Corrections, Additions, and Improvements; as they were
delivered to the Editor a little before his Death. Together with the
Notes of M^{r} Warburton. London, Printed for A. Millar, J. and R. Tonson,
H. Lintot, and C. Bathurst MDCCLXIV. _12mo, six volumes, half blue
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by C. Lewis._

Large paper copy, from the collection of George Daniel, who wrote on the
fly-leaf, "I never saw another copy" [on large paper and uncut]. In
addition to the plates by Grignion, several portraits have been added.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--OEuvres complettes d'Alexandre Pope, traduites en
francois. Nouvelle edition, Revue, corrigee, augmentee du Texte Anglois
mis a cote des meilleures Pieces, & ornee de belles Gravures. . . . A
Paris, Chez la Veuve Duchesne, . . . M. DCC. LXXIX. _Crown 8vo, eight
volumes, half red straight-grain morocco, gilt back, uncut edges._

Large and thick paper copy. Portrait by Le Beau after Kneller, and
fourteen plates after C. P. Marillier, besides a few inserted plates in
various states, and an original sepia drawing of Pope.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Poetical Works of Alexander Pope. A new edition.
Adorned with plates. . . . London: printed for F. J. Du Roveray, . . .
1804. _Royal 8vo, six volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

Largest paper copy, one of fifty printed.

Portrait by L. Schiavonetti after E. F. Burney, and nineteen
illustrations by Warren, Fittler, Neagle, Heath, etc., after Stothard,
Westall, Fuseli, Singleton, and others.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--Poetical Works. 1804. _Royal 8vo, six volumes bound in
four, red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Another copy, printed on largest paper.

The twenty-two illustrations by Warren, Fittler, Neagle, etc., after
Stothard and others are in three states: the etching, India proof before
letters, and proof before the inscription. In addition, fifty-seven
portraits of Pope have been inserted, including two drawings, one
hundred and thirty-two portraits of the chief characters mentioned,
eighty-six scenes from the Poems, and ten views. Over seventy of the
inserted plates are India proofs, and many more before the letters. The
series of illustrations by Marillier are often in two states, and among
the rarities are two prints of St. Cecilia by Bartolozzi (one coloured)
and the Three Graces, by the same engraver, a water-colour of Mahomet by
G. P. Harding, mezzotints of Wycherly, Newton, Pope, Jane Shore, and
others, Richelieu by Faithorne, Charles II. by Bouttats, Charles I. by
Hollar, Voiture by Nantueil, and the Penance of Jane Shore by Scriven,
India proof.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Works of Alexander Pope, Esq. in verse and prose.
Containing the principal notes of Drs. Warburton and Warton:
illustrations, and critical and explanatory remarks by Johnson,
Wakefield, A. Chalmers, F. S. A. and others. To which are added, now
first published, some Original Letters, with additional observations,
and Memoirs of the Life of the Author. By the Rev. William Lisle Bowles
. . . London: printed for J. Johnson . . . 1806. _8vo, ten volumes,
olive morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Lewis._

Large paper copy.

In addition to the regular series of twenty-one portraits and a
facsimile, forty other portraits and plates have been inserted in these
volumes, consisting of the series by Stothard, Burney, etc., artist
proofs on India paper, the illustrations by Marillier, some in two
states, and many other proofs.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Poetical Works of Alexander Pope [with a Memoir by
the Rev. Alexander Dyce, and a portrait of Pope] London William
Pickering 1831. _Foolscap 8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Works of Alexander Pope. New edition. Including
several hundred unpublished letters, and other new materials. Collected
in part by the late R^{t}. Hon. John Wilson Croker. With introductions and
notes. By Rev. Whitwell Elwin. . . . With portraits and other
illustrations. London: John Murray, . . . 1871. [-1889] . . . _8vo, ten
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Volumes I-IV, Poetry, are dated 1871-82; Volume V, Life and Index, 1889;
Volumes VI-X, Letters, 1871-86.


POPE AND SWIFT.--(I.) Miscellanea. in two volumes. Never before
Published. viz.

  I. Familiar Letters written to Henry
  Cromwell Esq; by Mr. Pope.

  II. Occasional Poems by Mr. Pope,
  Mr. Cromwell, Dean Swift, &c.

  III. Letters from Mr. Dryden, to
  a Lady, in the Year 1699.

  Volume I.

London: Printed [by Edmund Curll] in the Year, 1727. Price 5s.

  (II.) Miscellanea. The Second Volume.

  I. An Essay upon Gibing.
  With a Project for its Improvement.

  II. The Praise of Women.
  Done out of French.

  III. An Essay on the Mischief
  of giving Fortunes with Women in
  Marriage.

  IV. Swifteana: Or
  Poems by Dean Swift, and several
  of his Friends.

  V. Laus Ululae. The Praise of
  Owls. Translated from the Latin,
  By a Canary Bird.

London: Printed in the Year, 1727. _12mo, two volumes, original calf._

First authentic edition of Pope's Letters. The work was advertised in
_The Daily Post_ of August 12, 1726; the date 1727 on the title is
merely a device "to protract a little longer the semblance of novelty."

Portrait of Pope by Clark and Pine in Volume I, and of Swift by Vertue
in Volume II.


POPE AND SWIFT.--(I.) Miscellanies in prose and verse. The first volume.
London: Printed for Benjamin Motte, . . . M. DCC. XXVII. (II.)
Miscellanies. The second volume. London: Printed for Benjamin Motte . . .
M DCC XX VII. (III.) Miscellanies. The third volume. London: Printed
for Benj. Motte . . . , and Lawton Gilliver . . . 1732. (IV.)
Miscellanies. The last volume. London: Printed for B. Motte, . . . 1727.
_8vo, four volumes, sprinkled calf, gilt back._

First edition of Volumes I, II, and IV; second of Volume III.

The Preface is dated Twickenham, May 27, 1727, and signed "Jonath.
Swift. Alex. Pope." The Postscript following does not occur in the 12mo
edition: "P. S. We could not resist the Opportunity of improving
this Collection with two or three Pieces on parallel Subjects, written
by Persons of great Distinction, our particular Friends, for which
the Publick ought to thank us, and with which it was in the Power of
none but our selves to have obliged them."

Volume III has 276 pages, a leaf of Errata, and pages 1-100.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad. an Heroic Poem. In three Books, [woodcut
of vase of flowers] Dublin, Printed, London Reprinted for A. Dodd. [May
28] 1728. _8vo, brown morocco, blind-tooled, gilt top, uncut edges._

An uncut copy of the first issue of the first edition, measuring 8-1/4
by 5 inches. "B" of Thoms's list, similar to the copy in the British
Museum.

The distinguishing marks of this first issue are the misprint, "Book and
the man I sing" instead of "Books," page 1, line 1, and the blank page
on the verso of H2 instead of an advertisement.

Three varieties of the Owl frontispiece are found in the different
editions; the first as in this issue, the second in that edition of 1728
which is entirely reset (page 302), and the third in the variorum
edition, 1729. Perhaps the simplest method of identification is by means
of the legend on the scroll held by the Owl. In variety No. 1, the
second line, "Dunci-" has a hyphen at the end; in No. 2 it has not; in
No. 3 the second line is the complete word "Dunciad." The Owl in No. 1
is better drawn than in No. 2; the "s" in "Shakesp." is a long "s" in
No. 1, which is not the case in No. 2; all the lettering in No. 1 is
smaller than in No. 2. The Owl in No. 3 is more like No. 1 than No. 2
is; "P. & K. Arthur," on the book under the Owl's claws in 1 and 2 is
changed to "Gildon & Woolston" in No. 3; "New-castle" on the back of
the book next the floor in 1 and 2 is changed to "Blackmore" in No. 3.
The lettering in No. 3 corresponds more nearly in size to No. 1 than
does that in No. 2.

The present copy was once owned by Jonathan Richardson, the painter.

Collation: [Signature A unlettered]. Owl frontispiece, No. 1, A1 (recto
blank). Title with woodcut of a vase of flowers, A2 (verso blank). "The
Publisher to the Reader," A3-A4 and b1. Pages i-viii. Half-title, "The
Dunciad in three books," b2 (verso blank). Book 1, B1-C3, in fours. Book
II, C4-F2 recto. Book III, F2 verso-H2 (verso blank). Pages 1-51.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad. 1728. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by F. Bedford._

Another copy, measuring 7-5/8 by 4-5/8 inches.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--(I.) The Dunciad. An Heroic Poem. In three books.
[woodcut of a vase of flowers] Dublin, Printed, London Re-printed for A.
Dodd. 1728. (II.) A Compleat Key to the Dunciad.

/p
    How easily Two Wits agree,
    One finds the Poem; One the Key.
p/

London, Printed for A. Dodd. 1728. (Price 6d.) _12mo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, doubled with red morocco, wide border, gilt edges,
by Chambolle-Duru._

Second issue of the first edition. "C" of Thoms's list.

The distinguishing mark of this issue is on page 1, line 1 (ending with
"who"), where "Book and the man I sing" is corrected to "Books." The
text was probably printed from the same forms of type as the first
issue, with corrections of some, but not all, typographical
irregularities; e.g., on page vii of the Preface the second "i" of the
Roman numeral extends above the line in both issues; on page 1, line 1,
of the second issue the last letter in "who" has been raised to the
line, whereas in the first it is below. On page 5 the same space exists
in both issues between "F" and "i" of "First" in the running head-line;
on page 23, line 159, the misprint "spirits" occurs in both issues. In
the note on page 5 "Interlude" of the first issue is changed to
"Enterlude" in the second.

In the first issue the verso of H2 is blank; in the second it contains
an announcement: "Speedily will be Published The Progress of Dulness,
an Historical Poem. By an Eminent Hand. Price 1s. 6d."

Signature A of the first issue is not lettered; the first page of the
Preface in the second is lettered A3.

Page vii of the Preface in the first issue is lettered "b"; in the
second issue it is unlettered, making six leaves in A, the present issue
being a 12mo in sixes, the first an 8vo in fours, with corresponding
alterations in signature marks.

Collation: I. Owl frontispiece (No. 1), A1 (recto blank). Title with
woodcut of a vase of flowers, A2 (verso blank). "The Publisher to the
Reader," A3-A5. Pages i-viii. Half-title, A6 (verso blank). Text, B1-F2
(verso advertisement, "Speedily will be Published," etc.), in sixes.
Pages 1-51.

II. Title with woodcut, A1 (verso blank). "To the Public," A2-A3. Key,
A4-A8 and B1-B3. Pages 1-22. "Six New Books, just Publish'd," B4.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad. an Heroic Poem. In three books. The
Second Edition. Dublin, Printed; London, Reprinted for A. Dodd. 1728.
_12mo, maroon morocco, blind-tooled, gilt top, uncut edges._

"D" of Thoms's list. Presumably the third issue of the first edition,
although the title-page says "second edition." The Address from the
Publisher to the Reader appears to have been printed from the same forms
as the two preceding issues ("B" and "C" of Thoms's list), because of
many similarities of dropped letters and defective types. The text was
probably printed from the same type reimposed to admit of the
interpolation of notes, e.g., on page 5, "Lord Mayor of London" is added
to the note, "Sir Geo. Tho--"; on page 6, line 94, "And furious D--n" is
changed to "D--s"; on page 7 two notes are added, "Old Printers." and
"Sec. Philemon Holland." On page 22 the addition of a note of three lines
necessitated the transference of two lines of text to the top of page
23; "Spirts," line 159, page 23, is here correctly printed, whereas in
the previous issue it is "Spirits." The advertisement of "The Progress
of Dulness" on the verso of F2 does not occur here.

Lieut.-Col. Francis Grant's copy.

Collation: Owl frontispiece (No. 1), A1 (recto blank). Title with
ornament of a vase of flowers, other flowers at the side, A2 (verso
blank). "The Publisher to the Reader," A3-A5. Pages i-viii. Half-title,
A6 (verso blank). Text, B1-F2 (verso blank), in sixes. Pages 1-51.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad. an Heroic Poem. In three books. [Square
printer's ornament] Dublin, Printed, London Reprinted for A. Dodd. 1728.
_12mo, maroon morocco, blind-tooled, gilt top, uncut edges._

Undescribed by Thoms.

Another edition of 1728, presumably the second, rather than the
preceding. The type is entirely reset in the body of the work, although
the same founts are used. On the title-page it is larger and of a
heavier face than in the preceding edition, and the ornament is
different. The "U" in "Dunciad" is not symmetrical, as in the other
edition, but has a straight right and a curved left side. The Owl
frontispiece has been re-engraved (variety No. 2).

The first page of the Preface, A2 (A3 in the other edition), has a
large, heavy capital "I" for "It," whereas the other begins with an "I"
in a woodcut border.

"Who," the last word of the first line of the other edition, is the
first word of the second line here,--the distinguishing mark of this
edition. The type of the final page of advertisement is of much lighter
face than in the other edition.

It does not contain the additional notes on pages 5, 7, and 22, and the
spelling of "Interludes" in the note on page 5 is preserved; therefore
it was probably set up from a copy of "B" rather than "C," although the
misprint "spirits," page 23, line 159, is corrected.

Lieut.-Col. Francis Grant's copy.

Collation: Title with square printer's ornament, A1 (verso blank). "The
Publisher to the Reader," A2-A4. Pages i-viii. Text, A5-E6 (verso
advertisement of "The Progress of Dulness"), in sixes. Pages 1-51, 36
misprinted 56.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad, variorvm. With the Prolegomena of
Scriblerus [vignette of Ass]   London. Printed for A. Dod. 1729. _4to,
red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First complete, and author's first avowed edition. "F" of Thoms's list.

Four varieties of the Ass frontispiece are found in different editions.
No. 1 as in the present edition, No. 2 in the first variorum 8vo
edition, No. 3 in the reprint of the variorum 4to (page x), and No. 4 in
the Collected Works, folio, 1735.

Although the difference between Nos. 1 and 2 is perfectly evident when
the two plates are compared side by side, the details of No. 1 are so
faithfully re-engraved in No. 2 that a definite mark of differentiation
is difficult to give. In No. 1 the spacing of the letters in "vicum" in
the inscription at the left of the vignette is uneven; there is too much
space between "v" and its adjacent letters. This is not so in No. 2. In
No. 2, on the other hand, the "o" in "deferor" is raised above the line,
as it is not in No. 1. Perhaps the surest means is measurement; No. 1 is
4 inches in height; No. 2, 3-7/8 inches.

No. 3 is much smaller and has very evidently been re-engraved. The
spelling "Heywood" is found here instead of "Haywood," as in Nos. 1 and
2. In No. 4 the caption of the paper in the right foreground is "The
Free Briton" instead of "Bakers journal," as in Nos. 1, 2, and 3.

Collation: Title printed from a copper-plate, with vignette of the Ass,
No. 1, one leaf (verso blank). "Pieces contained in this Book," a1
(verso blank). Advertisement, a2. "Letter to the Publisher," a3-b4
(verso quotations). Pages 1-16. Half-title, "Martinus Scriblerus his
Prolegomena to the Dunciad," B1 (verso blank). "Testimonies of Authors,"
B2-D3 recto. "Martinus Scriblerus, of the Poem," D3 verso-E1. "Dunciados
Periocha," E2-E3 (verso blank). Half-title, "The Dunciad, in three
books, with Notes Variorum," E4 (verso blank). Text, F1-O4, in fours,
P1-P2, and Q1-Q2 (verso blank). "M. Scriblerus Lectori," Errata, Q3
recto. Index of Persons, Q3 verso-Q4 (verso "Index of Author's").
Half-title of Appendix, R1 (verso "Pieces contained in the Appendix").
Appendix, R2-X1 (verso "A List of All our Author's Genuine Works").
"Index of Things," X2-X4. Pages 11-18 and cxix-cxxiv. Addenda, one leaf
(verso blank).


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad, variorvm. 1729. _4to, red levant morocco,
gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy, uncut.

Collation: The same as the preceding copy, excepting that it lacks the
final leaf of Addenda.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad, variorvm. 1729. _4to, red levant morocco,
gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy, with the inscription on the title-page, "J. Caryll. Ex
dono authoris."

Collation: The same as the preceding copy.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad, variorvm. With the Prolegomena of
Scriblerus. [vignette of the Ass] London. Printed for A. Dob. [_sic_]
1729. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, side panels in floral
design, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

The first octavo variorum edition. "G" of Thoms's list. Probably
recomposed from the quarto edition, with the same fount of type. Some of
the errors of the preceding edition corrected and vignette of Ass
re-engraved.

Collation: Title printed from a copper-plate, with vignette of Ass
(variety 2), one leaf (verso blank). "Pieces contained in this Book," A1
(verso Advertisement). "A Letter to the Publisher," signed William
Cleland, A2-A4 and B1. Quotations, B2 recto. "Martinus Scriblerus his
Prolegomena to the Dunciad" (running title, "Testimonies of Authors"),
B2 verso-D4, in fours. "Martinus Scriblerus Of the Poem," E1-E3 recto.
Pages i-xxxvii. "Dunciados Periocha: or, Arguments to the Books," E3
verso-E4. Text, F1-P3 (verso "M. Scriblerus Lectori," Errata). Index of
Persons and Authors, P4. Pages 1-80. Half-title of Appendix, a1 (verso
"Pieces contained in the Appendix"). Appendix, a2-d3 (verso "A List of
All our Author's Genuine Works"). Pages i-xxx. Index of Things, d4-e2.
"Addenda to the Octavo Edition," f1.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad, variorum, with the Prolegomena of
Scriblerus. [engraving of the Ass] London: Printed and Re-printed, for
the Booksellers in Dublin, M DCCXXIX. _8vo, red morocco, gilt edges,
by The Club Bindery._

A reprint of the quarto variorum edition of 1729.

Collation: Title engraved by P. Simms with vignette of the Ass, variety
3, one leaf (verso blank). "Pieces contained in this Book," A1 (verso
blank). Advertisement, A2-A3 recto. "A Letter to the Publisher," A3
verso-A8 and B1 recto. Quotations, B1 verso-B2 (verso blank).
Half-title, B3 (verso blank). "Testimonies of Authors," B4 and C1-C8,
D1-D4, and E1-E2. "Martinus Scriblerus, of the Poem," E3-E6. "Dunciados
Periocha," E7-E8 and F1 (verso blank). Half-title, F2 (verso blank).
Text, F3-N4, in alternating eights and fours, beginning with F in fours.
"M. Scriblerus Lectori," N5 recto. "Index of Persons," N5 verso-N6
(verso "Index of Authors"). Half-title of Appendix, N7 (verso "Pieces
contained," etc.). Appendix, N8-R4 recto, ending with "A List of all our
Author's Genuine Works." Q3 recto is blank. "Index of Things," R4
verso-S2 (misprinted R2). Addenda, S3 (verso blank). Pages 1-192 and
185-205, misprinted 105.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad. With Notes variorum, and the Prolegomena
of Scriblerus. London: Printed for Lawton Gilliver at Homer's Head,
against St. Dunstan's Church, Fleetstreet, 1729. _8vo, red
straight-grain morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

"H" of Thoms's list.

Frontispiece of the Ass and also the Owl, the latter on the verso of a
false title between H1 and H2, preceding the text of the poem.

Collation: Half-title, one leaf (verso blank). Ass frontispiece, variety
1, A1 leaf (recto blank). Title, A2 (verso blank). "Pieces contained in
this Book," A3 misprinted A2 (verso blank). Advertisement, A4. "A Letter
to the Publisher," signed William Cleland and dated "St. James's Dec. 22
1728," B1-C3. Quotations, C4. Half-title, "Martinus Scriblerus his
Prolegomena to the Dunciad," D1. "Testimonies of Authors," D2-F3.
"Martinus Scriblerus of the Poem," F4-G2. "Dunciados Periocha: or,
Arguments to the Books," G3-G4 (verso blank). Half-title, "The Dunciad,
in three books, with Notes Variorum," H1 (verso blank). Second
half-title, "The Dunciad," one leaf (verso engraving of the Owl, variety
3). Text, H2-Z2 (verso blank), in fours. Index of Persons, Z3-Z4 (verso
Index of Authors). Half-title of Appendix, Aa1 (verso "Pieces contained
in the Appendix"). Appendix, Aa2-Ff2 recto, in fours. "A List of All our
Author's Genuine Works," Ff2 verso-Ff3 recto. Index of Things, Ff3
verso-Gg4. Pages 1-24, one leaf, 19-221, and ccxxii-ccxxxii. "M.
Scriblerus Lectori," Errata, one leaf.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad. With Notes variorum &c. 1729. _8vo, red
levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy, printed upon large paper.

Collation: The same as the preceding copy, excepting that it contains no
preliminary half-title.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad. With Notes variorum, and the Prolegomena
of Scriblerus. The Second Edition, with some Additional Notes. London:
Printed for Lawton Gilliver at Homer's Head, against St. Dunstan's
Church, Fleetstreet, 1729. _8vo, brown straight-grain morocco, gilt
fillets, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

"K" of Thoms's list.

This edition has many additional Notes and Epigrams, and seven pages
(four leaves) of Errata instead of two. It also contains the cancelled
leaf P3, with the preceding edition through Gg4, excepting that there
is no engraving of the Owl between H1 and H2, and pages 222-232 are
numbered in Arabic instead of Roman numerals. After page 232 are three
leaves of Errata, A1-A3, pages 1-6, and a fourth leaf, A4, containing
eight additional lines of Errata.

Collation: Ass frontispiece, No. 1, A1 (recto blank). Title printed in
red and black, A2 (verso blank). From this point on, the collation
agrees with eight lines of verse (159-166) on page 110 instead of
twelve; on page 109 the Remarks consist of ten lines signed
"Scriblerus," which with the next two lines were cancelled in later
editions.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad. With Notes Variorum, and the Prolegomena
of Scriblerus. Written in the Year, 1727. London: Printed for Lawton
Gilliver in Fleetstreet. [1733] _Small 8vo, red straight-grain
morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

"L" of Thoms's list.

The Declaration by the Author, pages 125-126, was declared before John
Barber, Mayor, January 3, 1732, and in the List of Books in which the
Author was abused, the last two on page 243 are dated 1733, which makes
the year of printing not earlier than 1733.

Owl frontispiece, variety No. 3.

Collation: Title, A1 (verso blank). "Pieces contained," etc., A2 (verso
blank). Advertisement, A3, misprinted A4-A4 recto. "A Letter to the
Publisher," A4 verso-B2. Quotations, B3. "Martinus Scriblerus of the
Poem," B4-B7. "Testimonies of Authors," B8-D7, in eights. Half-title, D8
(verso blank). Text, E1-O8, O3 misprinted N3. "By the Author, a
Declaration," in black letter, dated January 3, 1732, and given before
John Barber, Mayor, P1. "Index of Persons," P2-P3 (verso "Index of
Authors"). Appendix, P4-Q6 recto. "Index of Things," Q6 verso-R4 (verso
blank). Pages 1-263, 225 misprinted 125.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--[Half-title] The Dunciad, in three books, Written in
the Year 1727. with Notes Variorum, and the Prolegomena of Scriblerus.
[1735] _Folio, brown levant morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Part of Pope's Works, Volume II, folio, 1735. Ass vignette, No. 4, on F1
verso, and on F2 recto a headband engraved P. F.[ourdrinier] after W.
K[ent].

Collation: Half-title, B1 (verso blank). "A Letter to the Publisher,"
A2-E1 (verso Quotations) in twos. Arguments, E2-F1, ending with the Ass
vignette, No. 4. Book I, F2-I2 recto. Book II, I2 verso-O1. Book III,
O2-S2 (verso blank). "By the Author, a Declaration," T1. Index, T2.
Half-title, "Martinus Scriblerus," etc., U1 (verso blank). "Martinus
Scriblerus his Prolegomena," U2-Z2 and Aa1--Cc1. "Notes variorum,"
Cc2-Zz2 and Aaa1 recto. Appendix, Aaa1 verso-Eee1 recto. Index to the
Dunciad, Eee1 verso-Fff2 (verso "Index of the Authors of the Notes").
Pages 1-185, last page unnumbered.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--(I.) The New Dunciad: As it was Found In the Year
1741. With the Illustrations of Scriblerus and Notes Variorum. London:
Printed for T. Cooper at the Globe in Pater-noster Row. MDCCXLII.
[Price 1s. and 6d.] (II.) [Epistles of Horace] (III.) Poems and
Imitations of Horace. By Mr. Pope. Now first Collected together. [One
line from Horace] London: Printed for J. and P. Knapton, L. Gilliver, J.
Brindley, and R. Dodsley. M DCC XXX VIII. _4to, three works in one
volume, contemporary red morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges._

"O" of Thoms's list.

First edition of Book IV of the Dunciad, containing 39 pages. The second
work, the Epistles, has no general title. The Latin text is on the verso
of the page, the English on the recto, facing each other.

Collation: I. Half-title, "The New Dunciad" A1 (verso blank). Title, A2
(verso blank). "To the Reader," A3. Argument, A4. Book IV, B1-F4 (verso
blank), ending with four lines of Errata, in fours. Pages 1-39.

[Epistles] Half-title, "The First Epistle of the First Book of Horace,
B1 recto. Text in Latin and English, B1 verso-D4 (verso blank), ending
with two tail-pieces engraved by P. Fourdrinier.

Half-title, "The Sixth Epistle of the First Book of Horace," E1 recto.
Text, E1 verso-F4 (verso blank). Pages 1-39.

Half-title, "Epistles of Horace, imitated," A1 recto. Advertisement, A1
verso-A2 recto. Text, A2 verso-L1 (verso blank). Pages 1-81. Half-title,
"The First Ode of the Fourth Book of Horace," L2 recto. Text, L2
verso-L5 (verso blank). Pages 1-7.

III. Title, one leaf (verso Notice). Text in two Dialogues, B1-D5 (verso
blank), in fours. Pages 1-25, misprinted 23; 19 misprinted 91.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The New Dunciad: As it was found In the Year M DCC
XLI. With the Illustrations of Scriblerus, and Notes Variorum. London,
Printed for T. Cooper at the Globe in Pater-noster Row. M DCCXLII.
[Price 1s. and 6d.] _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt
top, uncut edges, by David._

"P" of Thoms's list.

Second edition of Book IV of the Dunciad, containing 44 pages, and 620
lines instead of 618. Lines 39-40 in the first edition,

/p
    "Oft her gay Sister's life and spirit fled;
    But History and Satire held their head:"
p/

are here expanded into four lines, 39-42:--

/p
    "But sober History restrain'd her rage,
    And promis'd Vengeance on a barb'rous Age:
    There sunk Thalia, nerve-less, faint, and dead,
    Had not her Sister Satire held her head:"
p/

Collation: Half-title, "The New Dunciad," A1 (verso blank). Title, A2
(verso blank). "To the Reader," A3. Argument, A4. Book IV, B1-G2 in
fours. Pages 1-44.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad, in four books. Printed according to the
complete Copy found in the Year 1742. With the Prolegomena of
Scriblerus, and Notes Variorum. To which are added, Several Notes now
first publish'd, the Hypercritics of Aristarchus, and his
Dissertation on the Hero of the Poem. [Two lines from Ovid]   London,
Printed for M. Cooper at the Globe in Pater-noster-row, M DCC XLIII.
_4to, red levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt top, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First complete edition. "R" of Thoms's list.

Collation: Half-title, "The Dunciad," etc., lettered A (verso blank).
Title, A2 (verso Announcement, "Speedily will be publish'd," etc.).
"Advertisement to the Reader," signed W. W.[arburton], A3. "By
Authority," with royal arms, A4 (verso blank). Half-title, "Martinus
Scriblerus," etc., A5 (verso blank). Quotations, A6. Cleland's "Letter
to the Publisher," A1 (repeated)-A4. "Testimonies of Authors," B1-D1
verso. "Martinus Scriblerus of the Poem," D1 verso-D3 verso. "Ricardus
Aristarcus of the Hero of the Poem," D3 verso-E3 (verso "Argument to
Book the First"). Text in four Books, E4-Z4 and Aa1-Cc4, in fours.
Half-title of Appendix, Dd1 (verso blank). Appendix, Dd2-Gg2 (verso
blank). Pages i-vi, two unnumbered leaves, ix-x, i-xxxvii, two
unnumbered pages and 40-235. Author's Declaration before the Mayor, Dd1.
"Index of Persons," Dd2-Dd3 recto. "Index of Matters," etc., Dd3
verso-Ee2.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Dunciad, in four books. 1743. _4to, red levant
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

Another copy, with a different collation of the preliminary leaves.

Collation: Half-title, A1 (verso blank). Title, A2 (verso "Speedily will
be publis'd"). "By Authority," A3 (verso blank). "Advertisement to the
Reader," A4. Half-title, "Martinus Scriblerus," etc., one leaf (verso
blank). "Letter to the Publisher," A1-A4. Quotations, one leaf, numbered
3 at the bottom of the recto and [ix]-[x] at the top. From this point on
the collation follows the preceding copy.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--A Miscellany on Taste. By Mr. Pope, &c. Viz. I. Of
Taste in Architecture. An Epistle to the Earl of Burlington. With
Notes Variorum, and a Compleat Key. II. Of Mr. Pope's Taste in Divinity,
viz. The Fall of Man, and the First Psalm. Translated for the Use of
a Young Lady. III. Of Mr. Pope's Taste of Shakespeare. IV.----His
Satire on Mrs. P----y. V. Mr. Congreve's fine Epistle on Retirement and
Taste. Address'd to Lord Cobham. [Two lines from Gay] London: Printed;
and sold by G. Lawton, . . . T. Osborn, . . . and J. Hughes. . . .
1732. Price 1s. _8vo, red straight-grain morocco, gilt edges, by The
Club Bindery._

Frontispiece designed by Hogarth, representing Pope on a scaffolding
white-washing Burlington House, while the Earl, as a labourer, climbs a
ladder.

A pirated edition of Pope's fourth Moral Essay, "Of Taste," folio, 1731.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--(I.) An Essay on Man. Address'd to a Friend. [Henry
St. John, Lord Bolingbroke] Part I. London: Printed for J. Wilford, at
the Three Flower-de-luces, be-hind the Chapter-house, St. Pauls.
[Price One Shilling.] [1732] (II.) An Essay on Man. In Epistles to a
Friend. Epistle II. London: Printed for J. Wilford, at the Three
Flower-de-Luces, behind the Chapter-House, St. Paul's. [Price One
Shilling.] (III.) An Essay on Man. In Epistles to a Friend. Epistle III.
London: Printed for J. Wilford, at the Three Flower-de-Luces, behind the
Chapter-House, St. Paul's. [Price One Shilling.] _Folio, brown levant
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

It is difficult to determine the priority of the various editions of the
four Epistles composing this Essay. Whereas there were once supposed to
be only four editions, it is now generally conceded that there are ten
or eleven, two of the First Epistle with "Part I." on the title-page,
two of the First with "Epistle I." on the title-page, three of the
Second, two of the Third, and one of the Fourth.

No recorded investigations are sufficiently advanced to be of service,
and in the matter of the numbering of the lines or neglect to number,
one theory is as plausible as another. It is granted, however, that the
editions of the First Epistle with "Part I." on the title-page were
earlier printed than those bearing "Epistle I."

The wording of the third title-page is the same as the second, with the
substitution of "Epistle III." for "Epistle II.," but they are
differently set up. In the imprint of Epistle II, "J. Wilford" is in
lower case italics, in Epistle III in small capitals; "Chapter-House" in
Epistle III is in lower case italics, and not in Epistle II.

In the Address to the Reader preceding Epistle II, Pope says, "The
Author has been induced to publish these Epistles separately for two
Reasons; The one, that he might not impose upon the Publick too much
at once of what he thinks incorrect; The other, that by this Method, he
might profit of its Judgement on the Parts, in order to make the Whole
less unworthy of it."

Collation: I. Title with ornament containing two birds, A1 (verso
blank). "To the Reader," beginning "As the Epistolary Way of Writing,"
etc., A2. Text, B1-E2 (verso blank), in twos. Pages 1-19.

II. Title with ornament containing a lion rampant, A1 (verso blank). "To
the Reader," A2 (verso blank). Text, B1-E1, in twos. Pages 1-18.

III. Half-title, A1 (verso blank). Title with ornament containing an
open book, A2 (verso blank). Text, B1-E2, ending with "N. B. The Rest
of this Work will be published the next Winter." Pages 1-20.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--(I.) An Essay on Man. in Epistles to a Friend. Epistle
I. Corrected by the Author. London: Printed for J. Wilford, at the Three
Flower-de-luces, be-hind the Chapter-house, St. Pauls. [Price One
Shilling.] [1734] (II.) An Essay on Man. In Epistles to a Friend.
Epistle II. London: Printed for J. Wilford, at the Three
Flower-de-Luces, behind the Chapter-House, St. Paul's. [Price One
Shilling.] (III.) [Same title as III. in the preceding edition] (IV.) An
Essay on Man. In Epistles to a Friend. Epistle IV. London: Printed for
J. Wilford, at the Three Flower-de-Luces, behind the Chapter-House,
St. Paul's. [Price one Shilling.] _Folio, red levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt edges, by R. W. Smith._

First edition of Epistle IV. Epistle I, although it contains only five
lines more than in the first edition, i.e., 286, is considerably
altered: e.g., between lines 22 and 23, six lines are inserted in the
present edition; lines 29-34 are here omitted, and 35-42 of the first
are transposed after 60; 95-100 and 111-114 in the first edition are
omitted in the second; 115-116 in the second are new; 149 in the first
is omitted in the second, and 142 in the second is new. These are a few
of the alterations.

In Epistle II the lines are not numbered, except line 175, although the
number is the same as in the first edition.

Epistle III is printed from the same forms of type as the first edition.

Collation: I. Title with ornament containing a face, one leaf (verso
blank). "To the Reader," beginning "The Author was induced to publish
these epistles separately," a1 recto. Contents, a1 verso-a2. Text, one
leaf and B1-D3 (verso blank), in twos. Pages 1-17.

II. Title with ornament of a basket of fruit and flowers, A1 (verso
blank). "To the Reader," beginning "The Author has been induced to
publish these epistles separately," A2 (verso blank). Text, B1-E1.
Pages 1-18.

III. The same as III of the first edition preceding, except that the
half-title is misbound after the title.

IV. Title with floral ornament, A1 (verso blank). Contents, A2 (verso
blank). Text, B1-F1, in twos. Pages 1-18; 17 misprinted 71. Leaf of
Advertisement, "Lately Published the three former Parts of An Essay on
Man," F2 (verso blank).


POPE, ALEXANDER.--Essais sur la Critique et sur l'Homme. Par M. Pope.
Ouvrages traduits de l'Anglois en Francois. Nouvelle edition. . . . A
Londres: [chez G. Smith] M DCC XXX VII. _4to, old brown morocco, gilt
back, side borders, gilt edges._


POPE, ALEXANDER.--Essai sur l'Homme, par Monsieur Alexandre Pope.
Traduction francoise En Prose, par M^{r}. S * * * *. Nouvelle edition.
Avec l'Original Anglois; ornee de Figures en Taille-douce [portrait of
Pope, engraved by Will in 1745 after Kneller, 1722] A Lausanne, Chez
Marc Chapuis. M DCC LXII. _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back and sides,
gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

English text and French prose translation. Four full-page engravings and
eight vignettes by Galimard and Soubeyran after Delamonce, and portrait
of Charles Frederic, Margrave of Baden and Hachberg, engraved by Will
after J. F. Guillibaud.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--An Essay on Man. By Alexander Pope, Esq. A new
edition. To which is prefixed a critical essay, By J. Aikin, M. D.
London: printed for T. Cadell, Jun. and W. Davies, . . . 1796. _Foolscap
8vo, half orange levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Four plates by Parker, Cromek, and Neagle after Stothard.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--(I.) Of the Use of Riches, an Epistle To the Right
Honorable Allen Lord Bathurst. [one of Pope's Executors] By Mr. Pope.
London: Printed by J. Wright, for Lawton Gilliver at Homer's Head
against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, 1732. Price 1s.

(II.) The First Satire of the Second Book of Horace, Imitated in a
Dialogue between Alexander Pope of Twickenham in Com. Midd. Esq; on
the one Part, and his Learned Council on the other. [Line from Horace]
London: Printed by L.[awton] G.[illiver] and sold by A. Dodd, near
Temple-Bar; E. Nutt, at the Royal Exchange; and by the Booksellers of
London and Westminster. M.DCC.XXXIII.

(III.) An Epistle [Of the Knowledge and Character of Men] to the Right
Honourable Richard [Temple] Lord Visc^{t}. Cobham. By Mr. Pope. [Six
lines from Horace, Sat. 10. Lib. 1.] London: Printed for Lawton
Gilliver, at Homer's Head against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet, 1733. [Price one Shilling.]

(IV.) An Epistle from Mr. Pope to Dr. Arbuthnot. [Four lines from
Tully.] London: Printed by J. Wright for Lawton Gilliver at Homer's Head
in Fleetstreet, 1734.

(V.) Of the Characters of Women: an Epistle to a Lady. By Mr. Pope.
London: Printed by J. Wright, for Lawton Gilliver at Homer's Head
against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, M DCCXXXV. (Price One
Shilling.)

(VI.) The Second Epistle of the Second Book of Horace, imitated by Mr.
Pope. Ludentis speciem dabit & torquebitur----London: Printed for R.
Dodsley, at Tully's Head, in Pall-Mall. M. DCC. XXXVII. (Price One
Shilling.) _Folio, six works in one volume, brown levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First editions. The Epistle to Lord Cobham, Of the Knowledge and
Character of Men, Of the Characters of Women, and Of the Use of Riches
are the first three of the four Moral Essays written in the form of
Epistles.

In this edition of the Characters of Women, Philomede (Henrietta,
Duchess of Marlborough in her own right), Atossa (her mother the Duchess
Sarah), and Chloe (Lady Suffolk) do not appear. The Epistle to Dr.
Arbuthnot is the Prologue to the Satires.

The First Satire of the Second Book of Horace is presumably the first of
four issues of the first of two editions printed in 1733, with no
defective type on the title-page, and the catch-word on page 13
misprinted "In" for "Whether." It has been asserted that there were five
editions of this poem in 1733, but an examination of various copies
shows that defective type in the text occurs in the same places in four
out of five instances. This would indicate that the type was actually
reset only once, although variations of signature marks and marginal
signs show that slight typographical changes were made as the sheets
passed through the press. These, however, are not important enough to
constitute new editions. The real test is in the composition of the text
itself. The sheets of the four issues are the same, but on one
title-page the words "Price One Shilling" are added after the date.

It has been asserted that there are three editions of the Second Epistle
of the Second Book of Horace; but, on the same grounds as in the
previous poem, it seems more probable that there were three issues of
one edition, parts of which were possibly reset, as indicated by
occasional corrections of defective type. The present issue is
presumably the first, with the misprint "16" for "15" at the foot of
page 12, an error corrected in the other two issues.

Collation: I. Title with floral ornament, one leaf (verso blank). Text,
B1-F2, in twos, ending with an Erratum of one line. Pages 1-20.

II. Title, A1 (verso blank). Half-title in Latin, A2 recto. Text in
Latin and English, A2 verso-E2 (verso blank), in twos. Pages 1-19.

III. Title, one leaf (verso blank). Text, B1-E1 (verso blank), in twos.
Pages 1-13. Leaf of Advertisement, E2 (verso blank).

IV. Title with ornament of flowers and birds, A1 (verso blank).
Advertisement, A2. Text, B1-F2, in twos. Pages 1-20, misprinted 30.

V. Title with ornament of a head, A1 (verso blank). Advertisement, A2
(verso blank). Text, B1-D2, in twos. Pages 1-16.

VI. Title with ornament of a vase of flowers, A1 (verso blank). Text,
A2-E2 (verso blank), in twos. Pages 1-19.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--(I.) The First Epistle of the First Book of Horace
imitated. By Mr. Pope. London: Printed for R. Dodsley . . . and sold by
T. Cooper . . . M DCC XXX VII. (II.) The Sixth Epistle of the First Book
of Horace imitated. By Mr. Pope. London: Printed for L. Gilliver . . . M
DCC XXXVII. . . . (III.) The First Epistle of the Second Book of Horace,
imitated. [Line from Horace] London: Printed for T. Cooper, . . . M.
DCC. XXX VII. . . . (IV.) The Second Epistle of the Second Book of
Horace, 1737. _Folio, four works in one volume, cloth, by The Club
Bindery_.

First editions. No. IV is of the issue with the correct numbering of the
note, 15, at the foot of page 12, and no numeral in the lower right-hand
corner of the page.

Collations: I. Title, one leaf (verso blank). Half-title, B1 recto. Text
(Latin on the verso, English on the recto), B1 verso-F2 (verso blank),
in twos. Pages 1-19; 18-19 misprinted 20-21.

II. Half-title, A1 (verso blank). Title, A2 (verso blank). Second
half-title, B1 recto. Text (Latin on the verso, English on the recto),
B1 verso-E2 (verso blank), in twos. Pages 1-15.

III. Title with large floral ornament containing figures and birds, A1
(verso blank). Advertisement, A2. Text, B1-G2 (verso blank), in twos.
Pages 1-23.

IV. Title with ornament of a vase of flowers, A1 (verso blank). Text,
A2-E2 (verso blank), in twos. Pages 1-19.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--The Universal Prayer. By the Author of the Essay on
Man. London: Printed for R. Dodsley, at Tully's-Head, in Pall-mall. M
DCC XXX VIII. (Price Six-Pence.) _Folio, red morocco, uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery_.

First edition. Title and three leaves without signatures.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--(I.) One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty Eight. A
Dialogue Something like Horace. By Mr. Pope. London: Printed for T.
Cooper at the Globe in Pater-noster-row. (Price One Shilling.) [1738]
(II.) One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty Eight. Dialogue II. By Mr.
Pope. London: Printed for R. Dodsley at Tully's Head in Pall-mall, M DCC
XXX VIII. (Price One Shilling.) _Folio, red levant morocco, by The Club
Bindery_.

First editions.

Collation: I. Half-title, A1 (verso blank). Title with ornament of a
basket of flowers, A2 (verso blank). Text, B1-D1, in twos. Pages 1-10.
"Books lately Printed for T. Cooper," D2 (verso blank).

II. Title with ornament as in I, A1 (verso blank). Text, A2-D2, in twos.
Pages 1-16.


POPE, ALEXANDER.--Verses Upon the Late D----ss of M----. [Duchess of
Marlborough] By Mr. P----. [woodcut] London: Printed for W. Webb, near
St. Paul's, 1746. (Price Sixpence.) _Small folio, red levant morocco, by
The Club Bindery_.

The Announcement on the last page reads: "These Verses are Part of a
Poem, entitled _Characters of Women_. It is generally said, the
D----ss gave Mr. P. 1000 l. to suppress them: He took the Money,
yet the World sees the Verses; but this is not the first
Instance where Mr. P's practical Virtue has fallen very short of
those pompous Professions of it he makes in his Writings."

Collation: [No signatures] Title with woodcut of a winged man with a
scythe and a headless statue, one leaf (verso blank). Text, two leaves,
on the verso of the second, an Announcement. Pages 1-5, last page
unnumbered.


POPE, ALEXANDER, _translator_.--The Odyssey of Homer, translated by A.
Pope London: Printed for F. J. Du Roveray, By T. Bensley . . . 1806.
_Royal 8vo, six volumes in three, red levant morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt edges, by Bedford_.

Illustrated by the portrait and twenty-four plates by Fittler and others
from the designs of Fuseli, Smirke, Singleton, Burney, Howard, etc.,
each in three states, and in addition eighteen scenes (eight on India
paper) and two portraits of Homer.


POPE, ALEXANDER.

  See Ayre, William.
      Dilworth, W. H.
      Parnell, Thomas.
      Ruffhead, Owen.
      Swift, Jonathan. Miscellanies, 1742.
      Thoms, W. J.
      Warton, Joseph.
      Young, Edward.


POPEIANA.--Love's Invention: or, the Recreation in Vogue. An excellent
new Ballad upon the Masquerades. To the Tune of, O! London is a fine
Town, &c. Honi Soit Qui Mal y Pense. London: Printed for E. Curll . . .
and R. Francklin . . . M. DCC. XVIII. . . . _4to, boards, uncut edges,
by The Club Bindery_.

Pages 18-22 contain a poem, "To the Ingenious Mr. Moore, Author of the
Celebrated Worm-Powder, By Mr. Pope."


POPEIANA.--The Progress of Dulness. By an Eminent Hand. Which will
serve for an Explanation of the Dunciad. . . . London: Printed in the
year M. DCC. XXVIII. . . . _Small 8vo, silk covers, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery_.

A poem of eight pages, "The Progress of Dulness. To Duncan Campbell," by
H. Stanhope, dated White-Hall, June 6, 1720, is followed by
"Observations on Windsor Forest, the Temple of Fame, and the Rape of the
Lock," twenty-one pages, Verses to the Countess of Warwick, two pages by
J. Markland, and five other pages, two of them advertisements.


POPEIANA, 1732-1741.-(I.) Stowe, the Gardens Of the Right Honourable
Richard Lord Viscount Cobham. Address'd to Mr. Pope. . . . London:
Printed for L. Gilliver . . . M DCCXXX II. . . .

(II.) A Dialogue on One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty-eight: together
with a Prophetic Postscript as to One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Thirty-nine. London: Printed for T. Cooper, . . . M. DCC. XXXVIII. . . .

(III.) Are these Things So? the Previous Question, from an Englishman
in his Grotto, to a Great Man at Court. . . . [by James Miller] London:
Printed for T. Cooper, . . . MDCCXL.

(IV.) The Great Man's Answer to Are these Things So? in a Dialogue
between His Honour and the Englishman in His Grotto. . . . By the Author
of Are these Things So. [by James Miller] London: Printed for T.
Cooper, . . . M DCC XL.

(V.) Yes, they are: being an answer to Are these Things so? the
previous question from An Englishman in his Grotto to a Great Man at
Court. . . . London: Printed for T. Cooper . . . M. DCC. XL. . . .

(VI.) What of that! Occasion'd by a Pamphlet, intitled, Are these
Things so? And its Answer, Yes, they are. . . . The Second Edition.
London: Printed for T. Cooper, . . . M DCC XL. . . .

(VII.) They are Not. . . . The Third Edition. London: Printed for T.
Cooper, . . . M DCCXL. . . .

(VIII.) Pro and Con. . . . London: Printed for J. Roberts, . . . M DCC
XLI. . . . _Folio, eight works in one volume, red morocco, gilt edges,
by The Club Bindery_.


POPEIANA.--The Court Dunciad. Inscrib'd to the Honourable Mrs.
Fitz----ms.

/p
    This Book's a Meaning, and, no Doubt,
    Ye all have Wit enough to find it out.
p/

London: Printed for J. Irons, and sold at the Pamphlet-Shops of London
and Westminster. 1733. [Price 1s.] _8vo, green morocco, gilt edges.
Bound with "Spiller's Jests" and three other works_.

Engraved frontispiece with four lines of verse beneath.

George Daniel's copy, with the following note on the fly-leaf: "Of 'The
Court Dunciad' I have never seen a second copy."


POPEIANA.--A Tryal of Skill Between a Court Lord, and a Twickenham
'Squire. Inscrib'd to Mr. Pope. [Quotation of ten lines and
copper-plate vignette] London: Printed and sold by J. Dormer, . . .
[Price One Shilling.] M. DCC. XXXIV. _Folio, cloth, by The Club Bindery.
Bound with three other works, all POPEIANA._


POPEIANA.--Sober Advice from Horace, to the Young Gentlemen about Town.
As deliver'd in his Second Sermon. Imitated in the Manner of M^{r} Pope.
Together with the Original Text, as restored by the Revd. R. Bentley,
Doctor of Divinity. And some Remarks on the Version. London: Printed for
T. Boreman, . . . [1735] _Folio, red levant morocco, by The Club
Bindery. Bound with ten other works_.

The text is in Latin and English.


POPEIANA.--Mr. P--pe's Picture in Miniature, but As Like as it can
stare; a poem: With notes. . . . London: Printed for G. Lion, . . .
1743. (Price Sixpence.) _Folio, cloth, by The Club Bindery. Bound with
three other works, all POPEIANA._


POPEIANA.--A Plan of Mr. Pope's Garden, As it was left at his Death:
with a Plan and Perspective View of the Grotto. All taken by J. Serle,
his Gardener. With An Account of all the Gems, Minerals, Spars, and Ores
of which it is composed, and from whom and whence they were sent. To
which is added, A Character of all his Writings. London: Printed for R.
Dodsley, . . . and Sold by M. Cooper . . . 1745. [Price 1s. 6d.] _4to,
green morocco, uncut edges, with the original blue wrappers bound in, by
The Club Bindery._

Folded plate, "A Plan of Mr. Pope's Garden as it was left at his Death.
Taken by Mr. Serle his Gardener," and two other plates after Serle, "A
Plan of the Grotto" and "A Perspective View of the Grotto."


POPEIANA.--A Plan of Mr. Pope's Garden. 1745. _4to, red levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Another copy, extra-illustrated by the insertion of three sepia, two
wash, and five pencil drawings of the grotto, four engravings, and an
autograph letter from Pope to Jonathan Richardson, the painter, ending,
"Yours most affectionately and faithfully."


POPEIANA.--Remarks on 'Squire Ayre's Memoirs of the Life and Writings of
Mr. Pope.   in a Letter to Mr. Edmund Curl, Bookseller, with Authentic
Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the said E---- C--l [Four lines
from the Dunciad] London: Printed for M. Cooper, . . . 1745. _8vo, red
straight-grain morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Contains half-title. The Letter is signed J. H.


POPEIANA.--Eloisa en dishabille: being a new version of that lady's
celebrated epistle to Abelard. Ascribed to Professor [Richard] Porson
. . . . London: printed in the year M DCCC XXII. _Post 8vo, original paper
wrappers, uncut edges._

One of fifty copies printed.


PORSON, RICHARD.--See Popeiana. Eloisa en dishabille.


PORTER, GEORGE RICHARDSON.--A Treatise on the Origin, Progressive
Improvement, and Present State, of the Manufacture, of Porcelain and
Glass, [vignette by E. Finden after H. Corbould] London. Printed for
Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, & Green, . . . 1832. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

Fifty woodcuts in the text.


[PORTLAND, DUKE OF.]--Catalogue of the Pictures belonging to His Grace
the Duke of Portland, at Welbeck Abbey, and in London M. D. CCC.
LXXXXIIII. [56 plates] London: printed at the Chiswick Press M. D. CCC.
LXXXX IIII. _4to, half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


PORTRAITS.--A Series of Proof Portraits and Embellishments executed by
first rate Artists, to illustrate the best English Novelists, Poets, and
Essayists . . . Got up under the direction of, and printed for, Charles
Cooke . . . 1805, _8vo, four volumes, old red morocco, gilt back panels
and side border, gilt edges._

Three hundred and forty plates, twenty-three being portraits.


PORTRAITS.--Physiognomical Portraits. One hundred Distinguished
Characters, From undoubted Originals, Engraved in the Line Manner by the
most eminent British Artists   London: published for the proprietor,
[John Johnson] by J. Major . . . 1824. _4to, two volumes, half purple
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Largest paper copy, proofs of the plates on India paper, including the
portrait of George IV. engraved on silver by Cosmo Armstrong and the
cancelled portraits of Aremberg, Michael Angelo, Vandyck, Pitt the
Younger, and Reynolds, and the engraver's etching of Lord William
Russell and Wolsey.


POTTER, ROBERT.--Poems by Mr. Potter. London: Printed for J. Wilkie, . . .
M DCC LXXIV. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Contains final leaf of Errata.


PRAED, WINTHROP MACKWORTH.--The Poetical Works of Winthrop Mackworth
Praed. New and Enlarged Edition . . . Redfield . . . New York   1860.
_4to, two volumes, half blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges_.

Large paper copy, "Editor's edition," fifty printed.


PRATT, SAMUEL JACKSON.--The Fair Circassian. A tragedy. As performed at
the Theatre-Royal, Drury-Lane, by the Author of Sympathy, a poem.
London: printed for R. Baldwin, . . . M DCC LXXXI. _8vo, morocco, by The
Club Bindery_.

First edition. The date 1780 in "Biographia Dramatica" is obviously a
misprint, as the play was not acted until 1781.


PRAYERS.--The Book of Common Prayer . . . according to the Use of the
Church of England; together with the Psalter . . . Oxford, printed by T.
Wright and W. Gill . . . M DCCLXXII. _12mo, contemporary red morocco,
gilt back, sides in mosaic of blue, red, and green elaborately tooled,
silk linings_.


PRAYERS.--The Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of The
Sacraments, And other Rites and Ceremonies of The Church, According to
the Use of the United Church of England and Ireland. With Notes.
Illuminated: And Illustrated with Engravings from the Works of the Great
Painters. London: John Murray, mdcccxlv. _8vo, grey velvet, back and
side borders embroidered in gold and colours to simulate jewels, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Twelve inserted plates.


PRESCOTT, WILLIAM HICKLING.--History of the Conquest of Mexico; with a
Preliminary View of the Ancient Mexican Civilization, and the Life of
the Conqueror, Hernando Cortez. By William H. Prescott London: R.
Bentley . . . MDCCCXLIII. _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition: with three portraits, two maps, and a facsimile.


PRESCOTT, WILLIAM HICKLING.--Biographical and Critical Miscellanies. By
William H. Prescott, . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1845. _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Portrait by W. Greatbatch after Ames.


PRESCOTT, WILLIAM HICKLING.--History of the Reign of Ferdinand and
Isabella the Catholic, of Spain. By William H. Prescott. . . . Fourth
edition revised. London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1846. _8vo, three
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Five portraits.


PRESCOTT, WILLIAM HICKLING.--History of the Conquest of Peru, with a
Preliminary View of the Civilization of the Incas. By William H.
Prescott   London: R. Bentley . . . 1847. _8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

First English edition. Two portraits and a map.


PRESCOTT, WILLIAM HICKLING.--History of the Reign of Philip the Second,
King of Spain. By William H. Prescott, . . . Boston: Phillips, Sampson,
and Company. 1855. [-1859] _8vo, three volumes, cloth._

First edition: with four portraits on steel by J. Brown, a facsimile,
and a map.


PRESCOTT, WILLIAM HICKLING.--History of the Reign of Philip the Second,
King of Spain. By William H. Prescott, . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . .
1855. [-1859] _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First English edition. Seven portraits by J. Brown and W. Greatbatch,
and a facsimile.

Presentation copy from the Author to Sir Archibald Alison.


PRETENDER.--An authentick Account Of the Conduct of the Young Chevalier,
[Charles James Edward] from His first Arrival in Paris, after his
Defeat at Culloden, to the Conclusion of the Peace at Aix-la-Chapelle.
Wherein The Motives of his late Behaviour are fully laid open and
explained; with the various Messages which passed between him
and the French King; and many other curious and interesting Particulars.
Never before made publick. In a Letter from a Gentleman residing at
Paris, to his Friend in London. . . . The Third Edition. London:
Printed and sold by Nutt . . . Dodd . . . Barnes . . . M,DCC,XLIX.
_8vo, Spanish calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Pratt._


PRETENDER.--Virtue in Distress: or, Heroism Display'd.
Containing A succint and true Relation of the Politick Methods taken
by the Court of France to save the young Pretender [Charles James
Edward] from being made a Sacrifice to the late Peace. Also the Steps
taken at the Congress at Aix la Chapelle, to frustrate any
Resolutions that might be formed to the Prejudice of his Claims and
Pretensions in E--d. With a just and particular Account of every
Thing that happened before, at, and after his being arrested at Paris,
to his Arrival at Avignon. To which is added, A short Narrative of the
various Hardships and Accidents that befell him in Scotland, after the
Battle of Culloden, till his Escape to France. London: Printed for B.
Dickinson, . . . 1749. _8vo, Spanish calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Pratt._

Portrait of the Young Pretender by J. G. after L. Tocque.


PRETENDER.--The young Chevalier: [Charles James Edward] or, a Genuine
Narrative Of all that befell that Unfortunate Adventurer, from His fatal
Defeat to his final Escape, after wandering about the Isles and
Highlands of Scotland, for the space of five Months, while continually
pursued by his Enemies, from whom all his narrow Escapes are
Circumstantially and Honestly related. The whole Interspersed With
many Curious Anecdotes of the Lives and Characters of the Chiefs who
accompanied, as well as those who abandoned him in his Distresses.
In Particular The Characters of Lord Lovat, and some others are
cleared up, all the Facts, hitherto unknown, are related on the most
indisputable Evidence, in the most Candid Manner, and every
fictitious Embellishment avoided. By a Gentleman, who was personally
acquainted not only with the Scenes of Action, but with many of the
Actors themselves. London: Printed for the Author, and by his
Appointment sold by R. Griffiths . . . [n. d.] _8vo, Spanish calf,
gilt back, red edges._


PRICE, H.--Poems on Several Subjects. By a Land-Waiter in the Port of
Poole. . . . London: Printed for T. Astley, . . . M. DCC. XLI. _8vo,
cloth, by The Club Bindery._


PRIDEAUX, SARAH T.--An historical Sketch of Bookbinding by S. T.
Prideaux with a Chapter on Early Stamped Bindings   By E. Gordon Duff.
London Lawrence & Bullen . . . 1893. _Post 8vo, buckram, uncut edges._

No. 30 of one hundred and thirty large paper copies printed, with two
illustrations.


PRIME, WILLIAM COWPER.--Pottery and Porcelain of all times and nations
with tables of factory and artists' marks for the use of collectors
[with 300 illustrations] By William C. Prime . . . [coloured ornament]
New York   Harper and Brothers, . . . 1878. _4to, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._

First edition.


PRIOR, JAMES.--The Life of Oliver Goldsmith, M. B. from a variety of
original sources. By James Prior, . . . London: John Murray, . . . M
DCCC XXX VII. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Frontispiece, Goldsmith's monument, engraved by E. Finden after
Nollekens, and facsimile.


PROCTER, BRYAN WALLER.--(I.) Dramatic Scenes and other Poems, by Barry
Cornwall [Bryan Waller Procter] London. Printed for C. and J. Ollier . . .
1819. (II.) A Sicilian Story, with Diego de Montilla, and other
Poems. By Barry Cornwall   London: C. and J. Ollier . . . 1820. _12mo,
two volumes in one, blue morocco, back and sides, gilt and blind-tooled,
gilt edges._

First editions.


PROCTER, BRYAN WALLER.--Effigies Poeticae: or The Portraits of the
British Poets illustrated by notes biographical, critical, and poetical,
[by Bryan Waller Procter]   London: James Carpenter and Son, . . .
MDCCCXXIV. _Folio, two volumes, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges._

Large paper copy. One hundred and forty portraits, proofs on India
paper.


PROCTER, BRYAN WALLER.--English Songs, and Other small Poems. By Barry
Cornwall, [vignette] London: Edward Moxon, . . . M DCCCXXXII. _12mo,
boards, uncut edges._

First edition.


PROCTER, BRYAN WALLER.--Charles Lamb: A Memoir. By Barry Cornwall
London: Edward Moxon & Co., . . . 1866. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges_.

Portrait of Lamb by Vinter after Hazlitt.


PROCTOR, ROBERT.--The Printing of Greek in the fifteenth century   By
Robert Proctor Printed for the Bibliographical Society at the Oxford
University Press December, 1900. _4to, original paper wrappers, uncut
edges._

Twenty-four plates.

No. VIII of Illustrated Monographs issued by the Bibliographical
Society.


PROCTOR, ROBERT.--See Duff, E. Gordon.


PROPERTIUS, PETRONIUS ARBITER, AND OTHERS.--Erotica. The Elegies of
Propertius, the Satyricon of Petronius Arbiter, and the Kisses of
Johannes Secundus. Literally translated, and accompanied by poetical
versions from various sources. To which are added, the Love Epistles of
Aristaenetus. Translated by R. Brinsley Sheridan and Mr. Halked. Edited
by Walter K. Kelly. London: Henry G. Bohn, . . . M DCCC LIV. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


PROPHECY OF LIBERTY.--The Prophecy of Liberty: a poem. Humbly Inscrib'd
to The Right Hon. Robert Lord Romney. . . . London, Printed for G.
Pearch, . . . and S. Steare, . . . MDCCLXVIII. _4to, paper wrappers, by
The Club Bindery._


PSALMS, ETC.--The Psalms Hymns and Spiritual Songs, of the Old and
New-Testament: Faithfully translated into English Meeter. For the Use,
Edification and Comfort of the Saints in Publick and Private, especially
in New-England . . . The Twenty-third Edition. Boston: Printed for D.
Henchman . . . 1730. _12mo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges,
by David._


PSALMS.--The Book of Psalms translated by the Rev. T. K. Cheyne London
Kegan Paul, Trench & Co., . . . MDCCCLXXXIIII _Crown 8vo, original
covers, uncut edges_.

Large paper copy, fifty printed.


PUCKLE, JAMES.--The Club, or, a Grey-Cap, for a Green-Head, in a
Dialogue Between Father and Son . . . The Fourth Edition, with
Additions. London, Printed for Edward Symon, . . . 1723. _12mo, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Portrait of Puckle by Cole after Closterman.


PUCKLE, JAMES.--The Club; in a Dialogue between Father and Son [London:
imprinted by J. Johnson] 1817. _Royal 8vo, tree calf, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Large paper copy, with portrait of the author by Bragg after Vertue, and
woodcuts by Thurston.


PUGLIA, JAMES PH. DE.--A short extract (concerning the Rights of Man and
Titles,) from the work entitled Man Undeceived. Written in Spanish by
James Ph. de Puglia, Sworn Interpreter, Translated from the original
by the Author, and corrected by a Democrat. In Confutation of several
Theological objections produced in an Aristocratical Piece by
Walworth, against Thomas Paine, published in a London paper of the
7th of August, and in the Federal Gazette of the 13th of October
last. . . . Or rather Mr. Burke, under the name of Walworth. However,
the Author computes him as a different writer. Philadelphia: Printed by
Johnston & Justice, . . . 1793. _8vo, green levant morocco, Janseniste,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._


PULIGA, COMTESSE DE.--Madame de Sevigne, her correspondents and her
contemporaries. By the Comtesse de Puliga. London: Tinsley Brothers . . .
1873. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Two steel portraits and facsimile.


PUNSTER'S POCKET BOOK.--The Punster's Pocket-Book, or the Art of Punning
enlarged. By Bernard Blackmantle. . . . illustrated with numerous
original designs by Robert Cruikshank. London: Published by Sherwood,
Gilbert, and Piper . . . 1826. _Crown 8vo, half green morocco._

Portrait of George IV. and sixteen woodcuts.


PUSHKIN, ALEXANDER.--See Borrow, George.


PYTHAGOREAN.--Memoirs of a Pythagorean, in which are delineated the
Manners, Customs, Genius and Polity of Ancient Nations, interspersed
with a variety of Anecdotes . . . London: printed for G. G. J. and J.
Robinson . . . 1785. _8vo, three volumes in one, blue levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by David._