Produced by Curtis Weyant, Christine D. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Posner Memorial Collection
(http://posner.library.cmu.edu/Posner/))






   Transcriber's Note

   Led by the belief that the spelling and punctuation of each
   entry is based directly on the original title pages no
   intentional 'corrections' have been made to the content. The
   text in this e-book is as close to the original printed text
   as pgdp proofing and postprocessing could get it. In some
   entries larger spaces are used as spacers between
   bibliographic fields instead of punctuation. These have been
   retained to the best of our ability and are represented as
   non-breaking spaces.


  A CATALOGUE OF
  Books in English
  later than 1700, forming
  a portion of the Library
  of Robert Hoe New
  York 1905


  EX
  LIBRIS
  ROBERT
  HOE

VOLUME I


CATALOGUE

VOLUME I


  ONE HUNDRED COPIES ONLY, INCLUDING
  THREE UPON IMPERIAL
  JAPANESE VELLUM. PRINTED BY
  THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, CAMBRIDGE


  A Catalogue of Books
  in English
  Later than 1700


  Forming a Portion of the Library
  of Robert Hoe

[Illustration]

VOLUME I

  Privately Printed
  New York . 1905


  THIS CATALOGUE WAS COMPILED BY
  CAROLYN SHIPMAN




THE CATALOGUE


ABBADIE, JAQUES.--Chemical Change in the Eucharist. In four letters
shewing the relations of faith to sense, from the French of Jaques
Abbadie, by John M. Hamersley, . . . London: Sampson Low, Son, and
Marston, . . . Published for the Editor. [1867]   _4to, vellum boards,
red edges._


A BECKETT, GILBERT ABBOTT.--The Comic History of England. By Gilbert
Abbott a Becket. [vignette] With ten coloured etchings, and one hundred
and twenty woodcuts, by John Leech. . . . [London]   Published at the
Punch Office, . . . MDCCCXLVII. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


A BECKETT, GILBERT ABBOTT.--The Comic History of Rome. By Gilbert Abbott
a Beckett. Illustrated by John Leech. [London] Bradbury and Evans. [n.
d.] _8vo, cloth, uncut edges_.

First edition. Ten steel plates, coloured, engraved title and
ninety-eight other woodcut illustrations.


ABELARD AND HELOISE.--A Nineteenth Century, and familiar history of the
Lives, Loves, & Misfortunes, of Abeillard and Heloisa, A Matchless Pair,
who flourished in the twelfth century: a Poem, in twelve cantos.
Illustrated with ten engravings. By Robert Rabelais, the Younger. . . .
London: printed for J. Bumpus, . . . 1819. _8vo, half red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

The engravings are in aquatint by Landseer and Lewis after the designs
of Thurston.


ACLAND, SIR HENRY.--See Ruskin and Acland.


ACT OF PARLIAMENT.--[First page] Anno Regni Decimo Quarto Georgii III.
Regis. 1774. Regulation of Massa-chuset's Bay. [woodcut arms] An Act
of Parliament Passed in the Fourteenth Year of the Reign of His
Majesty King George the Third. 1774. An Act for the better regulating
the Government of the Province of the Massachuset's Bay, in
New-England. &c. [Colophon] Boston: Printed by M. Draper, Printer to His
Excellency the Governor, and the Honorable His Majesty's Council,
1774. _Folio, brown morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

No title, A1-A2, and B1-B3 (verso blank). Pages 1-9.


ADAMSON, JOHN.--Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Luis de Camoens. By
John Adamson. . . . London: printed for Longman . . . MDCCCXX. _Royal
8vo, two volumes, citron levant morocco, back and sides in gold and
green mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

Large paper copy, with nine portraits of Camoens, three in two states,
proofs before and after letters, and nine illustrations after the
designs of Harding and others, proofs on India paper. All but two of
these plates are inserted.


ADDISON, JOSEPH.--A Poem to his Majesty [William III.], Presented to
the Lord Keeper. By Mr. Addison, of Mag. Coll. Oxon. London: Printed for
Jacob Tonson, at the Judge's-Head near the Inner-Temple-Gate in
Fleetstreet, MDCXCV. _Folio, figured silk._ _Bound with_ YALDEN'S
_"Conquest of Namur," 1695_.

First edition.

Collation: Title, A1 (verso blank). Dedication to Sir John Sommers, Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, A2. Poem, B1-D1 in twos. Pages 1-10.


ADDISON AND STEELE. [First page] Numb. I The Spectator. [Two lines from
Horace] To be Continued every Day. Thursday, March 1, 1711. [Two
columns of text] [At the bottom of the verso] London: Printed for Sam.
Buckley, at the Dolphin in Little Britain: and Sold by A. Baldwin in
Warwick Lane. _Folio, two volumes, green vellum, gilt sides, uncut
edges._

The complete file of the "Spectator" as originally issued in numbers,
seven volumes, Nos. I-DLV from Thursday, March 1, 1711, through
Saturday, December 6, 1712, every day except Sunday. It was resumed on
Friday, June 18, 1714 and published Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays
through No. 635 (misprinted 636) Monday, December 20, 1714. The
numbering of Vol. VIII. is incorrect: 578 is misprinted 579; 584-586,
590-592, 596-598 misprinted 585-587, 591-593, 597-599; 602-604
misprinted 603-605, there is no 607, and 620 is misprinted 610.

Volume VIII. has the imprint: "London: Printed by S. Buckley in Amen
Corner, and J. Tonson in the Strand; where Advertisements will be taken
in." The first two numbers (556 and 557) contain the announcement: "To
be continued every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday."

Each number consists of one folio leaf, similar to Number I described
above, with a classical quotation varying each day. The words "To be
Continued every Day" were not printed after the first number, and in No.
XVI the imprint on the verso was increased by the addition: "where
Advertisements are taken in; as also by Charles Lillie, Perfumer, at
the Corner of Beauford-Buildings in the Strand." Nos. XVII and CCCCLXXIV
do not contain the addition, and it is discontinued from CCCCXCIX to the
end of Volume VII.

"Price Two-pence" first appears at the bottom of No. CCCCXLIV.

Inserted are two legal papers containing contracts and agreements
between the publisher and Addison and Steele.

There was a ninth volume, from Monday, Jan. 3, 1715, through August 5, a
spurious continuation by William Bond.

The present copy was formerly in the libraries of Lord Hope and the Earl
of Munster.


ADDISON, JOSEPH.--Cato. A Tragedy. As it is Acted at the Theatre-Royal
in Drury-Lane, by Her Majesty's Servants. By Mr. Addison. [six lines in
Latin from Seneca] London: Printed for J. Tonson at Shakespear's Head
over-against Catherine-Street in the Strand. MDCCXIII. _4to, blue
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. A-I in fours, half-title on A1, title on A2. The Prologue
is by Pope, the Epilogue by Dr. Garth.


ADDISON, JOSEPH.--Poems on Several Occasions. With a Dissertation upon
The Roman Poets. By Mr. Addison. London: Printed for E. Curll . . .
1719. [Second title] A Dissertation upon the most celebrated Roman
Poets. Written originally in Latin by Joseph Addison, Esq; Made
English by Christopher Hayes, Esq; London, Printed for E. Curll. . . .
M DCC XVIII. _8vo, red morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Portrait by Van der Gucht after Kneller and a plate by E.
Kirkall after La Vergne.

The signatures and pagination of the Poems and the Dissertation are
different.


ADDISON, JOSEPH.--The Works of the Right Honourable Joseph Addison, a
new edition, with notes by Richard Hurd, D.D., Lord Bishop of Worcester.
London: printed for T. Cadell and W. Davies. . . . 1811. _Royal 8vo, six
volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Large paper copy. Illustrated by the insertion of fifty plates in
addition to the usual illustrations, including twenty-six portraits of
the author, and engravings after the designs of Stothard, Smirke,
Westall, Corbould, etc., many in two states and nearly all proofs,
either on India paper, or before letters.


ADDISON, JOSEPH.--The Miscellaneous Works of Joseph Addison. . . .
Oxford, published by D. A. Talboys. MDCCCXXX. _Crown 8vo, four volumes,
half brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


ADDISON, JOSEPH.--Days with Sir Roger de Coverley a reprint from "The
Spectator" with illustrations by Hugh Thomson. London: Macmillan and
Co. . . . 1892. . . . _Royal 8vo, buckram, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


ADVENTURER, THE.--See British Essayists.


AESCHYLUS.--The Agamemnon of AEschylus. Translated from the Greek,
illustrated by a Dissertation on Grecian Tragedy, etc. By John S.
Harford . . . [vignette]. London: John Murray MDCCCXXXI. _8vo, half
green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Engraved title and seventeen plates, chiefly from antique gems.


AESOP.--Select Fables of Esop and other Fabulists. In three books. . . .
[vignette]. Birmingham, Printed by John Baskerville, for R. and J.
Dodsley. . . . 1761. Price bound Five Shillings. _8vo, red levant
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Dodsley's first edition. Frontispiece, fifteen plates in compartments,
and seven vignettes by Grignion after Wale. Life of AEsop by de Meziriac
and Essay on Fable by R. Dodsley.


AESOP.--Select Fables of Esop and other Fabulists in three books.
Birmingham, Printed by John Baskerville, for R. and J. Dodsley . . .
1764. _8vo, green morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Derome
the younger, with his ticket._

Second edition. Frontispiece and six smaller illustrations by Grignion
after the designs of Wale.


AESOP.--Select Fables of Esop and other Fabulists. In three books . . .
Birmingham, Printed by John Baskerville for R. and J. Dodsley &c [n. d.]
_8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by F. Bedford._

Frontispiece, and one hundred and fifty-nine illustrations on fifteen
plates, also seven vignettes.


AESOP.--The Fables of AEsop, with a Life of the Author: and Embellished
with one Hundred & twelve Plates. London: Printed for John Stockdale . . .
1793. _Imperial 8vo, two volumes, olive levant morocco, gilt back,
quintuple fillet on the sides, gilt over uncut edges, by Cuzin._

The illustrations are by Landseer, Audinet, Bromley, Anker Smith,
Grainger, and others.


AESOP.--The Fables of AEsop, 1793. _Imperial 8vo, two volumes, green
levant morocco, back and sides richly ornamented in gold and mosaic,
gilt edges, by Riviere._

Another copy.


AESOP, &c.--The Fables of AEsop, and others, with designs on wood, by
Thomas Bewick . . . Newcastle: Printed by E. Walker . . . 1818.
_Imperial 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back and side panels in the
manner of Roger Payne, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Imperial paper copy, with portrait of Bewick by Nicholson after Ramsay,
and the certificate or receipt signed by Thomas and Robert Elliot
Bewick.


AESOP.--The Fables of AEsop selected, told anew and their history traced
by Joseph Jacobs done into pictures by Richard Heighway. London
Macmillan & Co. New York 1894. _Imperial 8vo, buckram, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed.


AIKIN, JOHN.--Essays on Song-Writing; with a Collection of such English
Songs as are most eminent for poetical merit. By John Aikin. A new
edition, with additions and corrections, and a Supplement, by R. H.
Evans [vignette] London: printed for R. H. Evans . . . 1810. _8vo, calf,
gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by Matthews._


AIKIN, LUCY.--The Life of Joseph Addison. By Lucy Aikin. London: printed
for Longman . . . [&c] . . . 1843. _Post 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

Portrait by J. Brown after Kneller.


AINSWORTH, WILLIAM HARRISON.--Rookwood: a romance. . . . London: Richard
Bentley, . . . (successor to Henry Colburn.) 1834. _Post 8vo, three
volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Presentation copy from the author, with his book-plate on
a fly-leaf.


AINSWORTH, WILLIAM HARRISON.--Jack Sheppard: a Romance. By W. Harrison
Ainsworth, Esq. . . . with illustrations by George Cruikshank. London:
Richard Bentley, . . . 1839. _Post 8vo, three volumes, green levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with portrait and duplicate set of the twenty-six plates
from the original numbers.


AINSWORTH, WILLIAM HARRISON.--Jack Sheppard: a Romance. By W. Harrison
Ainsworth, Esq. . . . with illustrations by George Cruikshank. London:
G. Routledge & Co. . . . M DCCC LIV. _8vo, half green levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

First octavo edition, with fifteen plates.


AINSWORTH, WILLIAM HARRISON.--Old Saint Paul's: a Tale of the Plague and
the Fire. By William Harrison Ainsworth. . . . With illustrations by
John Franklin. . . . London: Hugh Cunningham, . . . 1841. _Post 8vo,
three volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, side fillets, gilt over
uncut edges._

First edition, with twenty plates.


AINSWORTH, WILLIAM HARRISON.--Old Saint Paul's: a Tale of the Plague and
the Fire. By William Harrison Ainsworth Esq . . . New Edition, with
Illustrations by John Franklin and H. K. Browne. London: Parry, Blenkarn
& C^{o} . . . 1847. _8vo, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Champs._

First octavo edition, with twenty-one plates, including the engraved
title.


AINSWORTH, WILLIAM HARRISON.--The Miser's Daughter: a tale. By William
Harrison Ainsworth, . . . With [20] Illustrations by George Cruikshank
. . . . London: Cunningham and Mortimer, [T. C. Savill, Printer] . . .
1842. _Post 8vo, three volumes, maroon levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


AINSWORTH, WILLIAM HARRISON.--Windsor Castle. An Historical Romance, by
W. Harrison Ainsworth . . . New Edition. Illustrated by George
Cruikshank and Tony Johannot, with designs on wood, by W. Alfred
Delamotte. London: Henry Colburn . . . MDCCCXLIV. _8vo, citron levant
morocco, back panel and side corner ornaments, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Reymann._

First octavo edition, with a portrait of the author, engraved title,
eighteen plates, and eighty-seven woodcuts.


AINSWORTH, WILLIAM HARRISON.--Mervyn Clitheroe. By William Harrison
Ainsworth. Illustrated by Hablot K. Browne. London: George Routledge &
Co., . . . 1858. . . . _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition. Frontispiece, engraved title, and twenty-two other
plates.


AKENSIDE, MARK.--The Pleasures of Imagination. A Poem. In three books.
London: Printed for R. Dodsley . . . M.DCC.XLIV. _4to, green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._


AKENSIDE, MARK.--The Pleasures of Imagination. By Mark Akenside, M.D. To
which is prefixed a critical Essay on the Poem, by Mrs. Barbauld.
London: printed for T. Cadell, Jun . . . MDCCXCV. _Post 8vo, half brown
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Portrait of the author (inserted) and four plates engraved on copper
from the designs of Stothard.


AKENSIDE, MARK.--Odes on Several Subjects. London: Printed for R.
Dodsley . . . And Sold by M. Cooper . . . M.DCC.XLV. _4to, mottled calf,
gilt back, gilt edges, by Riviere._


AKENSIDE, MARK.--The Poetical Works of Mark Akenside [with a Memoir by
the Rev. Alexander Dyce, and a portrait of Akenside]   London   William
Pickering 1835. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


AKENSIDE, MARK.--The Poetical Works of Mark Akenside [with Life of the
poet by the Rev. Alex. Dyce] London. Bell and Daldy . . . 1866. _Crown
8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Matthews._

Large paper copy, with four portraits of the author and fifteen other
plates inserted, for the most part proofs.


ALCIATUS, ANDREAS.--Andreae Alciati Emblematum Fontes Quatuor; Namely an
account of the original collection made at Milan, 1522, and photo-lith
fac-similes of the editions, Augsburg 1531, Paris 1534, and Venice 1546.
Edited by Henry Green, . . . with A Sketch of Alciat's Life and
Bibliographical Observations respecting the Early Reprints. Published
for the Holbein Society by A. Brothers, . . . Manchester, &c . . .
M.DCCC.LXX. _4to, cloth, uncut edges._


ALCIATUS, ANDREAS.--Andreae Alciati Emblematum Flumen abundans; or,
Alciat's Emblems in their full Stream. Being a photo-lith fac-simile
reprint of The Lyons Edition, by Bonhomme, 1551; And of Titles, &c., of
Similar Editions, 1548-1551. Edited by Henry Green, . . . With An
Introduction and an Alphabetical List of all the Latin Mottoes.
Published for the Holbein Society by A. Brothers, . . . Manchester; &c
. . . M.DCCC.LXXI. _4to, cloth, uncut edges._


ALDRICH, THOMAS BAILEY.--The Poems of Thomas Bailey Aldrich. Household
Edition with illustrations. Boston . . . Houghton, Mifflin and Company
. . . 1885. _12mo, tree calf, gilt back, gilt edges._


ALEMAN, MATEO.--The Life of Guzman d'Alfarache; or, the Spanish Rogue.
To which is added, The Celebrated Tragi-Comedy, Celestina . . . Written
in Spanish By Mateo Aleman. Done into English from the New French
Version, and compar'd with the Original. By several Hands. Adorn'd with
Sculptures by Gaspar Bouttats. London, Printed for R. Bonwick, . . .
1708-1707. _8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges,
by Riviere._

Frontispiece and sixteen plates engraved on copper.


ALEMAN, MATEO.--See Mendoza, Diego Hurtado.


ALEXANDER, FRANCESCA.--Christ's Folk in the Apennine. Reminiscences of
her friends among the Tuscan Peasantry. By Francesca Alexander. Edited
by John Ruskin, . . . I. The Peace of Polissena. II. 'Ponsatevi Voi!'
III. The Mother of the Orphans. IV. The Nun's School in Florence. George
Allen, Sunnyside, Orpington, Kent. 1887. _8vo, four parts, original
paper covers._


ALEXANDER, WILLIAM.--A Journey to Beresford Hall the seat of Charles
Cotton Esq^{re}. the celebrated author and angler. By W. Alexander . . .
London. John Russell Smith . . . MDCCCXLI. _4to, original cloth._

One hundred copies printed, being a facsimile of the original manuscript
with a title-page and frontispiece lithographed, and (inserted) a
coloured portrait of Walton, as well as a proof mezzotint of Cotton.


ALISON, SIR ARCHIBALD.--History of Europe from the Commencement of the
French Revolution to the Restoration of the Bourbons in MDCCCXV. By
Archibald Alison . . . New Edition with Portraits William Blackwood and
Sons Edinburgh and London MDCCCXLIX-L. _Royal 8vo, fourteen volumes
bound in seventeen, half blue morocco, uncut edges._

In addition to the portraits published with this work, nearly fifteen
hundred plates have been added, portraits, views, military costumes,
battle-scenes, etc., etc. Nearly every plate is in proof state,
generally before letters, and the majority on India paper. Forty
drawings in water-colour and sepia have been added, including a portrait
of Tom Paine by Collins.


ALLEN, CHARLES DEXTER.--A Talk On Book-Plates   A Paper read by Charles
Dexter Allen at a Meeting of the Club of Odd Volumes of Boston,
Massachusetts Boston   The Club of Odd Volumes 1901. _4to, half brown
morocco, uncut edges._

No. 36 of fifty-five copies printed.


ALLSTON, WASHINGTON.--Lectures on Art, and Poems, by Washington Allston.
Edited by Richard Henry Dana, Jr.   New York: Baker and Scribner MDCCCL.
_12mo, blue levant morocco, back and sides paneled with quintuple lines,
gilt edges, by Motte._


ALMANAC--The Ladies Diary: or Woman's Almanack, For the Year of our
Lord, 1751. Being the Third after Bissextile, or Leap-Year. Containing
an Improvement of Arts and Sciences, For the Use and Pleasure of the
Fair-Sex. Being the Forty Eighth Almanack publish'd of this Kind. . . .
Printed by A. Wilde, for the Company of Stationers, 1751. _Small 8vo,
original blue morocco, covered with tooling in the "cottage" pattern,
with flap, silver catch, and pockets._


ALMANAC.--The Comic Almanack, for 1835; [and each succeeding year to
1853] an Ephemeris in Jest and Earnest, containing "all things fitting
for such a work." By Rigdum Funnidos, Gent. Adorned with a dozen of
"righte merrie" cuts, pertaining to the months, sketched and etched by
George Cruikshank. [&c] London: imprinted for Charles Tilt . . .
[1835-1853]. _Post 8vo, nineteen years bound in five volumes, half green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

A complete set of the original issue, with covers preserved. The
title-pages show no alteration of importance until 1841, when the
imprint changes to "Tilt and Bogue," again changing, in 1844, to "David
Bogue." In 1848-49 the size is reduced one third, and the abbreviated
title has the line, "Edited by Horace Mayhew." In 1850 the Almanac
renews its original size, and H. G. Hine is introduced by name as the
co-illustrator with Cruikshank. The last year of publication is "Edited
by Robert B. Brough."

From the commencement to 1847 Cruikshank contributed twelve plates to
each year, but in 1848 the number was reduced to six, in 1849 to five
(including a folded frontispiece), and the four concluding years have
each a folded frontispiece in colours, as well as six plates. Each year
a large number of woodcut illustrations supplement the plates.

The original issue of Thackeray's "Stubbs's Calendar," or the "Fatal
Boots" appeared in the volume for 1839, and his "Barber Cox" the year
following.


ALMANAC.--The Book-Lover's Almanac for the year 1893 with illustrations
by Henriot. Duprat & Co. New York 1893. _Small 4to, original covers,
uncut edges._

Japan paper copy, two hundred printed, with twelve coloured plates, a
frontispiece, and floral borders.


ALMANAC.--The Book-Lover's Almanac for the year 1894, with etchings by
Robida, and other illustrations. New York: Duprat & Co. 1894 . . .
Second year. _Small 4to, original covers, uncut edges._

Japan paper copy, one hundred and fifty printed, with four etchings,
seven studies in designs for ex-libris by Henriot, and vignettes by E.
Mas.


ALMANAC.--The Book-Lover's Almanac for 1895. Duprat & Co. New York.
_Small 4to, original covers, uncut edges._

Japan paper copy, one hundred printed, with four plates and other
illustrations.


ALMANAC.--The Book-Lover's Almanac for the year 1896. Duprat & Co.
publishers   New York. _Small 4to, original covers, uncut edges._

Japan paper copy, one hundred printed, No. 12, with thirty
illustrations, the frontispiece in two states, black and coloured. A
border of printer's marks surrounds each page of text.


ALMANAC.--The Book-Lover's Almanac for 1897 Duprat & Co., . . . New
York. _Small 4to, original covers, by Louis J. Rhead, uncut edges._

Japan paper copy, one hundred printed, with title-page and page border
by W. H. Lippincott, and thirteen other illustrations, two of them
coloured.


AMADIS OF GAUL.--See Southey, Robert.


AMES, JOSEPH.--Typographical Antiquities: Being an Historical Account of
Printing in England: With some Memoirs of our Antient Printers, and A
Register of the Books printed by them, from The Year MCCCCLXXI to the
Year MDC. with an Appendix concerning Printing in Scotland and Ireland
To the same Time. By Joseph Ames, . . . London: Printed by W. Faden, and
sold by J. Robinson, . . . MDCCXLIX. _4to, old red morocco, rich gilt
back and sides, gilt edges._

Engraved frontispieces, portrait of Caxton, and facsimiles.


AMICIS, EDMONDO DE.--Holland And Its People By Edmondo de Amicis
Zuyder Zee Edition [33 illustrations] New York . . . G. P. Putnam's Sons
The Knickerbocker Press   1885. _Royal 8vo, one volume extended to two,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt over uncut edges,
with the original covers bound in, by The Club Bindery._

No. 21 of twenty-five copies printed, with an extra set of proof
etchings printed upon satin. Extra illustrated by the insertion of
eighty-eight portraits and views, including etchings by Hollar, Ostade,
many scenic illustrations, proofs on India paper, engravings of famous
paintings, etc.


AMORY, THOMAS.--The Life of John Buncle, Esq. by Thomas Amory, Gent. A
new edition. . . . London: Septimus Prowett, . . . MDCCCXXV. _Crown 8vo,
three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Southey's copy, with his autograph on the title-page, and the date,
"London, 14 June, 1828."


ANACREON: with Thomas Stanley's translation. Edited by A. H. Bullen.
Illustrated by J. R. Weguelin. London: Lawrence & Bullen . . .
MDCCCXCIII. _4to, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 185 of one thousand copies printed, with ten plates.


ANCIENT METRICAL TALES.--See Hartshorne, C. H.


ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS.--The Lives And most remarkable Maxims Of the
Antient Philosophers. London: Printed for B. Barker, . . . and R.
Francklin, . . . 1726. Price Bound _2s. 6d._ _12mo, sprinkled calf, gilt
back, gilt over uncut edges, by Bedford._


ANDERDON, J. L.--The River Dove with some quiet thoughts on the happy
practice of Angling. London: William Pickering   1847. _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


ANDERDON, J. L.--The River Dove. 1847. _Post 8vo, green calf, gilt back,
gilt edges._

Another copy.


ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN.--Danish Fairy Legends and Tales by Hans
Christian Andersen. London   William Pickering   1846. _Post 8vo, half
orange morocco, uncut edges._


ANDERSON, ALEXANDER.--A general History of Quadrupeds. The figures
engraved on wood, chiefly copied from the original of T. Bewick, By A.
Anderson. First American edition, With an Appendix, containing some
American animals not hitherto described. New York: printed by G. & R.
Waite, . . . 1804. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back and edges, by
Riviere._


ANDERSON, ALEXANDER.--A Collection of one hundred and seventy Engravings
by Alexander Anderson, M.D. executed on wood after his Ninetieth Year.
Privately printed by Charles L. Moreau. New York. 1872. _8vo, cloth._

Twelve copies, printed for the first time from the original blocks, with
an Introduction by E. A. Duyckinck.


ANDERSON, HUGH.--See Tailfer, Patrick.


ANDERSON, JAMES.--The Constitutions of the Antient and Honourable
Fraternity of Free and Accepted Masons, containing their History,
Charges, Regulations, &c collected and digested, by Order of the Grand
Lodge, from their old Records, faithful Traditions, and Lodge-Books, for
the Use of Lodges, by James Anderson D.D. and carefully revised,
continued, and enlarged by John Entick M.A. A New Edition, with
Alterations and Additions, by a Committee appointed by the Grand Lodge.
London: Printed for Brother W. Johnston . . . MDCCLXVII   In the Vulgar
Year of Masonry 5767. _4to, old red morocco, the back and sides covered
with gilt tooling of birds, flowers, etc., doubled with green morocco,
wide floral border, gilt edges, by Robert Black in 1767._

Frontispiece by Cole after Boitard.

A remarkable specimen of Scotch bookbinding, from the collection of the
Earl of Gosford. Reproduced in Quaritch's Fac-similes of Book-Binding.


ANDREWS, MILES PETER.--Fire and Water! a comic opera: in two acts.
Performed at the Theatre Royal in the Hay-Market. By Miles Peter
Andrews. London: Printed for T. Cadell, . . . M.DCC.LXXX. _8vo, red
morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. A-F in fours, half-title on A 1.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--A Choice Collection of Books from the Aldine
Presses in the possession of * * * * * * with a short introductory
account of the Aldus family, taken mostly from Horne's Introduction to
Bibliography. New York: privately printed. [De Vinne Press] MDCCCLXXXV.
_12mo, original vellum covers, uncut edges._

One of fifty copies printed upon vellum, with two illustrations.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--Jean Grolier de Servier, Viscount d'Aguisy
Some account of his Life and of his famous Library   By William Loring
Andrews. New York   MDCCCXCII. The De Vinne Press. _4to, cloth, uncut
edges._

One hundred and forty copies printed on hand-made paper, with fourteen
illustrations, some in gold and colours.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--Roger Payne and his Art   a short account of
his life and work as a binder   By William Loring Andrews   New York
printed at the De Vinne Press   1892. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Holland paper copy, one hundred and twenty printed, with eleven plates.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--Roger Payne and his Art.   1892. _8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

Another copy. One of ten printed on Japan paper, with eleven plates,
nine in gold and colours.

Presentation copy from the author.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--The Bradford Map   The City of New York at the
time of the granting of the Montgomerie Charter   a description thereof
compiled by William Loring Andrews to accompany a fac-simile of an
actual survey made by James Lyne and printed by William Bradford in 1731
   New York   printed at the De Vinne press   1893. _8vo, cloth, gilt
top, uncut edges._

Eleven full-page plates and numerous illustrations in the text. One
hundred and forty-two copies printed.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--A Stray Leaf from the Correspondence of
Washington Irving and Charles Dickens by William Loring Andrews. Printed
at the De Vinne Press New-York, 1894 and embellished with engravings on
copper and zinc. _Small 4to, cloth, uncut edges._

One of fifteen copies printed on Japan paper, with the frontis-piece in
three states.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--"Among my Books" Printed for William Loring
Andrews At the De Vinne Press. New-York. 1894. _8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

One of ten copies printed on Japan paper, with twenty-seven
illustrations, some in gold and colours.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--An Essay on the Portraiture of the American
Revolutionary War being An Account of a number of the Engraved Portraits
connected therewith, remarkable for their rarity or otherwise
interesting by William Loring Andrews   To which is added an Appendix
containing lists of Portraits of Revolutionary characters to be found in
various English and American publications of the eighteenth and the
early part of the nineteenth century   Illustrated with reproductions by
the Photogravure Process of twenty of the Original Engravings   New York
   Printed by Gilliss Brothers for the Author and sold by Dodd, Mead &
Co. MDCCCXCVI. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

One of fifteen copies printed on Japan paper, with eighteen plates.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--The Journey of the Iconophiles around New York
in search of the historical and picturesque   Printed at New York in the
year of our Lord, eighteen hundred and ninety-seven . . . and of the
discovery of the Island of Manhattan by Hendrik Hudson the two hundred
and eighty-eighth. _8vo, light brown levant morocco, gilt edges, by The
Club Bindery._

One of eighty-seven copies on Japan paper, with twelve full-page plates
by E. D. French.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--New Amsterdam New Orange   New York   a
chronologically arranged account of engraved views of the city from the
first picture published in MDCLI until the year MDCCC by William Loring
Andrews [arms of New Amsterdam and New York in colour]   Published and
for sale by Dodd, Mead and Company, New York   Anno Domini MDCCCXCVII.
_8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Thirty-six full-page plates and fifteen other illustrations.

One of thirty copies printed on Japan paper, with extra impressions of
the fourteen engravings on copper by E. Davis French and of the Duke's
plan in colour.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--A Prospect of the Colledges in Cambridge in
New England . . . engraved by Wm. Burgis in 1726 the description
compiled by William Loring Andrews   Published and for sale by Dodd,
Mead and Company   New York   MDCCCXCVII. _8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._

One of twenty-five copies printed on Japan paper, with six
illustrations.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--Fragments of American History illustrated
solely by the works of those of our own engravers who flourished in the
XVIIIth century   Privately printed for William Loring Andrews   New
York   MDCCCXCVIII. _8vo, half calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Presentation copy from the author, eighty printed on hand-made paper,
with eighteen reproductions of rare engravings, four being in colours.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--A Trio of Eighteenth Century French Engravers
of Portraits in Miniature. Ficquet. Savart. Grateloup. William Loring
Andrews [The Gilliss Press]   MDCCCXCVIIII. _8vo, vellum boards, uncut
edges._

One of one hundred and sixty-one copies on Japan paper, with
twenty-eight illustrations.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--James Lyne's Survey or, as it is more commonly
known The Bradford Map a plan of the City of New York at the time of the
granting of the Montgomery Charter in 1731   An Appendix to an account
of the same compiled in 1893 by William Loring Andrews. New York   Dodd,
Mead & Company [The Gilliss Press]   MDCCCC. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

One of thirty-two copies printed on Japan paper, with three facsimile
maps.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--Gossip About Book Collecting by William Loring
Andrews   New York published by Dodd, Mead and Company. . . . [The
Gilliss Press]   M :: C :: M. _8vo, two volumes, original paper covers,
gilt top, uncut edges._

Thirty-two copies printed on Japan paper, with twelve illustrations, of
which six are coloured.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--Paul Revere and his Engraving by William
Loring Andrews   New York   Charles Scribner's Sons   MCMI. _8vo, vellum
boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

One of thirty-five copies printed on Japan paper, with engraved title by
E. D. French, seventeen full-page plates, one of them printed in colour,
and fifteen other illustrations.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--The Iconography of the Battery and Castle
Garden by William Loring Andrews [vignette] New York   Charles
Scribner's Sons   MCMI. _8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

One hundred and thirty-five copies printed on American hand-made paper,
with twenty illustrations, three of them in colour.


ANDREWS, WILLIAM LORING.--Bibliopegy in the United States and Kindred
subjects by William Loring Andrews   Dodd, Mead and Company New York
1902. _8vo, original boards, uncut edges._

One hundred and forty-one copies printed on Van Gelder paper, with
thirty illustrations, some coloured.


ANNUAL ANTHOLOGY.--See Southey, Robert.


ANTIDOTE.--An Antidote against Melancholy. Being a Collection of
Fourscore Merry Songs, wherein Those on the same Subject and Key, are
placed in an agreeable Succession, In Relation to the Different
Measures of Time, After the Manner of Suits of Lessons. The Music of
them all entirely new, and several of the Songs never before set to
Music. London: Printed for Daniel Browne, . . . MDCCXLIX. _Post 8vo,
tree calf, gilt back, gilt edges._


ANTI-JACOBIN.--Poetry of the Anti-Jacobin. London: printed for J.
Wright, . . . 1799. _Foolscap 8vo, half purple levant morocco, uncut
edges._


ANTI-JACOBIN.--Poetry of the Anti-Jacobin: comprising the celebrated
political & satirical poems, parodies, and jeux-d'esprit of the Right
Hon. George Canning, the Earl of Carlisle, Marquis Wellesley, the Right
Hon. J. H. Frere, W. Gifford, Esq. the Rt. Hon. W. Pitt, G. Ellis, Esq.
and others. With explanatory notes, by Charles Edmonds. Second edition,
considerably enlarged. With six etchings by the famous caricaturist
James Gillray. London G. Willis, . . . MDCCCLIV. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


ANTOMMARCHI, F.--The Last Days of the Emperor Napoleon. By Doctor F.
Antommarchi, his physician. . . . London: printed for Henry Colburn, . . .
1825. _8vo, two volumes, blue morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

Original sepia drawing of Napoleon on horseback, inserted.


APULEIUS.--Cupid and Psyche: a mythological tale, from the Golden Ass of
Apuleius. Second edition. [translated by Hudson Gurney]   London:
printed for J. Wright . . . 1800. _Royal 8vo, half calf, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Kaufmann._

Large paper copy. Printed by Bulwer, with two plates after the designs
of Cipriani.


ARABIAN NIGHTS.--The Arabian Nights . . . Translated by the Reverend
Edward Forster. With engravings, from pictures by Robert Smirke . . .
London: printed for William Miller . . . 1802. _8vo, five volumes, half
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

George Daniel's copy on large paper (?), with ten plates by Corbould,
Kirk, etc., and a portrait of Smirke, in addition to the regular series
of twenty-four illustrations.


ARABIAN NIGHTS.--The Thousand and One Nights, commonly called, in
England, the Arabian Nights' Entertainments. A new translation from the
Arabic, with Copious Notes. By Edward William Lane . . . illustrated
with many hundred engravings on wood, from original designs by William
Harvey . . . London: Charles Knight and C^{o} MDCCCXXXIX-XL-XLI. _Royal
8vo, three volumes, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


ARABIAN NIGHTS.--The Thousand and One Nights   The Arabian Nights
Entertainments   With an Introduction illustrative of the religion,
manners, and customs of the Mohammedans by Jonathan Scott, . . . With
Nineteen Original Etchings by Ad. Lalauze   London   J. C. Nimmo and
Bain . . . 1883. _8vo, four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 71 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with proof
etchings on Japan paper.


ARABIAN NIGHTS.--See Burton, Sir Richard and Payne, John.


ARISTAENETUS.--See Propertius.


ARISTOPHANES.--The Comedies of Aristophanes translated into familiar
blank verse, with notes, preliminary observations on each play, etc. By
C. A. Wheelwright . . . to which is added a dissertation on the old
Greek comedy from the German of Wachsmuth. Oxford: D. A. Talboys . . .
MDCCCXXXVII. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


ARISTOTLE.--[Works, translated from the Greek by Thomas Taylor]
London: printed for the translator, . . . by Robert Wilks, . . . 1806.
[-1812] _Royal 4to, ten volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

The contents are as follows: I. The Physics or Physical Auscultation,
1806; II. The Organon or Logical Treatises, 1807; III. Treatises on the
Heavens, on Generation and Corruption, and on Meteors, 1807; IV.
Treatises on the Soul, etc., 1808; V. The History of Animals and
Treatise on Physiognomy, 1809; VI. Treatises on the Parts and
Progressive Motion of Animals, Problems, and Treatise on Indivisible
Lines, 1810; VII. Rhetoric, Poetic, and Nicomachean Ethics, 1811; VIII.
Great, and Eudemian, Ethics, Politics, and Economics, 1811; IX.
Metaphysics, etc., 1812; X. Dissertation on the Philosophy of Aristotle,
1812.


ARISTOTLE.--The Politics and Economics of Aristotle, translated, with
notes, original and selected, and analyses. To which are prefixed, an
introductory essay and a life of Aristotle; By Dr. Gillies. By Edward
Walford. . . . London: Henry G. Bohn, . . . MDCCCVIII. _Post 8vo, half
brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


ARISTOTLE.--Aristotle's History of Animals. In ten books. Translated by
Richard Cresswell, . . . London: Henry G. Bohn, . . . 1862. _Post 8vo,
half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


ARMORIAL BOOK PLATES.--147 Examples [one coloured] of Armorial Book
Plates. From various Collections. (Second Series.) London: W. Griggs &
Sons, . . . 1892. _Royal 4to, half cloth, decorated sides._


ARMSTRONG, JOHN.--Miscellanies; by John Armstrong, M.D. . . . London,
Printed for T. Cadell, . . . MDCCLXX. _Small 8vo, two volumes, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by David._

First edition.


ARNE, THOMAS AUGUSTINE.--Phoebe at Court, an operetta, of two acts.
written originally by R. Lloyd, Esq. The Dialect necessarily
contracted and turned into Hudibrastic Verse for Recitative, new
songs added, and the music entirely new; composed by Dr. Arne. London:
printed by Cox and Bigg, in the Savoy. MDCCLXXVI. [Price One Shilling
and Sixpence.] _4to, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by Pratt._

First edition. A-K in twos, title on A1. Altered from Lloyd's
"Capricious Lovers."


ARNETT, JOHN ANDREWS.--Bibliopegia; or, the Art of Bookbinding, in all
its branches. Illustrated with engravings. By John Andrews Arnett.
London: Richard Groombridge . . . 1835. _12mo, half red levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._


ARNETT, JOHN ANDREWS.--Bibliopegia, 1835. _12mo, green levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Joly._.

Another copy.


ARNETT, JOHN ANDREWS.--An Inquiry into the Nature and Form of the Books
of the Ancients; with a History of the Art of Bookbinding, from the
times of the Greeks and Romans to the present day; interspersed with
bibliographical references to men and books of all ages and countries.
Illustrated with numerous engravings. By John Andrews Arnett. London:
Richard Groombridge. . . . 1837. _12mo, cloth, uncut edges._


ARNOLD, SIR EDWIN.--The Light of Asia or the Great Renunciation
(Mahabhinishkramana) being the Life and Teaching of Gautama, Prince of
India and Founder of Buddhism (as told in verse by an Indian Buddhist)
by Sir Edwin Arnold . . . A new [Lotus] edition London: Truebner & Co.,
. . . 1889. _Square 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

Etched portrait by Damman, and woodcuts.

No. 49 of one hundred and twenty-six copies printed.


ARNOLD, MATTHEW.--The Strayed Reveller, and other poems. By A. London:
B. Fellowes . . . 1849. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. One hundred copies printed. Withdrawn from circulation
after a few copies had been sold.


ARNOLD, MATTHEW.--Poems. By Matthew Arnold. Third edition. London:
Longman, Brown, Green, Longmans, & Roberts. 1857. _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


ARNOLD, MATTHEW.--Merope. A Tragedy. By Matthew Arnold   London:
Longman, Brown, Green, Longmans, & Roberts. MDCCCLVIII. _Foolscap 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


ARNOLD, MATTHEW.--New Poems by Matthew Arnold. London   Macmillan and
Co. MDCCCLXVII. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


ARNOLD, MATTHEW.--New Poems by Matthew Arnold. Second edition. London
Macmillan and Co. MDCCCLXVIII. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


ARNOLD, MATTHEW.--Poems by Matthew Arnold . . . London   Macmillan and
Co.   MDCCCLXIX. _Post 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


ARNOLD, THOMAS.--Christian Life, its course, its hindrances, and its
helps. Sermons, preached mostly in the chapel of Rugby School. By Thomas
Arnold, . . . London: B. Fellowes, . . . 1841. _8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


ARNOLD, THOMAS.--Fragment on the Church. Second edition: in which are
contained appendices on the same subject. By Thomas Arnold, . . .
London: B. Fellowes, . . . 1845. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


ARNOLD, THOMAS.--The Miscellaneous Works of Thomas Arnold, . . .
Collected and republished. [by Arthur Penrhyn Stanley] London: B.
Fellowes, . . . 1845. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


ARNOLD, THOMAS.--History of Rome. By Thomas Arnold, . . . Fourth
edition. London: B. Fellowes; F. and J. Rivington; &c . . . 1845.
[-1846.] _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

The title-pages of Volumes II and III say "third edition," and the
latter is dated 1846.


ARNOLD, THOMAS.--Introductory Lectures on Modern History, delivered in
Lent term, M DCCC XLII. With the Inaugural Lecture delivered in
December, M DCCC XLI. By Thomas Arnold, . . . Fourth edition. London: B.
Fellowes, . . . 1849. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


ARNOLD, THOMAS.--See Stanley, A. P.


ARNOLD, WILLIAM HARRIS.--A Record of First Editions of Bryant, Emerson,
Hawthorne, Holmes, Longfellow, Lowell, Thoreau, Whittier. Collected by
William Harris Arnold With An Essay on Book-madness by Leon H. Vincent.
Printed at the Marion Press. Jamaica . . . 1901 . . . _4to, cloth, uncut
edges._

Facsimiles of title-pages.


ASHBEE, H. S.--See Graham, Alexander.


ASTLE, THOMAS.--The Origin and Progress of Writing, as well hieroglyphic
as elementary, illustrated by engravings taken from marbles, manuscripts
and charters, ancient and modern: also some account of the origin and
progress of printing. Second edition, with additions. By Thomas Astle,
. . . London: printed by T. Bensley, . . . for J. White, . . . 1803.
_Folio, russia, gilt back and sides._

Large paper copy. Portrait and thirty-one plates of characters, some in
colour.


ATHENAEUS.--The Deipnosophists or Banquet of the Learned of Athenaeus.
Literally translated By C. D. Yonge, B.A. with an appendix of poetical
fragments, rendered into English verse by various authors, and a general
index. . . . London: Henry G. Bohn, . . . MDCCCLIV. _Post 8vo, three
volumes, half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


ATKINSON, T. D.--See Foster, J. E.


AUCASSIN AND NICOLETE done into English by Andrew Lang. London: 1887
published by David Nutt . . . _8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back and
side panels, a l'oiseau, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Japan paper copy on large paper, sixty-three printed. No. 20, with
woodcut border to title, etched frontispiece by Head, and nine etchings
by Bida, proofs on India paper (inserted).


AUCASSIN AND NICOLETTE, a love story; edited in old French and rendered
in modern English (with Introduction, Glossary, etc.) by F. W.
Bourdillon, M.A. London Kegan Paul, Trench, & Co. MDCCCLXXXVII. _Crown
8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed.


AUCASSIN & NICOLETE: Being a Love Story translated out of the Ancient
French by Andrew Lang. Roycrofters . . . East Aurora, New York
mdcccxcix. _12mo, green ooze calf, uncut edges._


AUDUBON, JOHN JAMES.--The Birds of America, from drawings made in the
United States and their territories. By John James Audubon, . . . New
York: published by J. J. Audubon. . . . 1840. _Royal 8vo, seven volumes,
green levant morocco, gilt back, side corners, gilt edges, with the
original covers bound in, by Bedford._

Five hundred coloured plates.


AUDUBON AND BACHMAN.--The Quadrupeds of North America. By John James
Audubon and the Rev. John Bachman . . . New York   published by V.G.
Audubon. 1849 [MDCCCLI-1854]. _Royal 8vo, three volumes, half brown
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

One hundred and fifty-five coloured plates.


AUDUBON AND BACHMAN.--The Quadrupeds of North America. 1849-54. _Royal
8vo, three volumes, green levant morocco, emblematic gilt back, side
corners, gilt edges, with the original covers bound in, by Bedford._

Another copy.


AUSTEN, JANE.--Pride and Prejudice: a Novel . . . by the author of
"Sense and Sensibility." London: Printed for T. Egerton . . . 1813.
_12mo, three volumes, half green levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Riviere._

First edition.


AUSTEN, JANE.--Emma: a novel. In three volumes. By the Author of "Pride
and Prejudice," &c. &c. . . . London: printed for John Murray, [by C.
Roworth] 1816. _12mo, three volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Dedicated to His Royal Highness, the Prince Regent.


AUSTEN, JANE.--Northanger Abbey: and Persuasion. By the author of "Pride
and Prejudice," "Mansfield-Park," &c. With a biographical notice of the
author. . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1818. _12mo, four volumes in
two, blue levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt top, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First editions. The Notice is dated London, December 13, 1817, and the
Postscript, December 20.


AUSTIN, ALFRED.--The Season: a Satire. By Alfred Austin. With [tinted]
frontispiece of "The Modern Muse," by Thomas George Cooper. . . .
London: Robert Hardwicke, . . . 1861. _Post 8vo, half grey morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._


AVERY, SAMUEL PUTNAM.--Some Account of the "Gibbs-Channing" Portrait of
George Washington Painted by Gilbert Stuart   Privately Printed   New
York. [DeVinne Press] 1900. _8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

One of two hundred copies printed, with portrait.


AYRE, WILLIAM.--Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Alexander Pope,
Esq; Faithfully Collected from Authentic Authors, Original
Manuscripts, and the Testimonies of many Persons of Credit and Honour:
with Critical Observations. Adorned with the Heads of divers Illustrious
Persons, treated of in these Memoirs, curiously engrav'd by the
best Hands. In Two Volumes. By William Ayre, Esq; London: Printed by
his Majesty's Authority, For the Author, and Sold by the Book-sellers
of London and Westminster. M DCC XLV. _Small 8vo, two volumes, red
straight-grain morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Thirteen portraits engraved by Parr.


AYTOUN, WILLIAM EDMONDSTOUNE, _editor_.--The Ballads of Scotland edited
by William Edmondstoune Aytoun, . . . Second edition revised and
augmented . . . William Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh and London
M DCCC LIX. _Post 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


AYTOUN, WILLIAM EDMONDSTOUNE.--Lays of the Scottish Cavaliers and other
poems by William Edmonstoune Aytoun . . . Twelfth edition. William
Blackwood and Sons Edinburgh and London MDCCCLIX. _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


B., G.--Love the Leveller: or the Pretty Purchase. Acted at the
Theatre Royal, in Bridges-Street, Covent-Garden. Written by G. B. Gent.
[Two lines from Hor. Sat. L. 1.]   London, Printed for E. Rumbal, and
are to be sold by J. Nutt, . . . 1704. _4to, blue levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by David._

First edition. A-K2 in fours, title on A1.


BABBAGE, CHARLES.--The Ninth Bridgewater Treatise. A fragment. By
Charles Babbage, Esq. . . . London: John Murray, . . . MDCCCXXXVII.
_8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


BACHMAN, JOHN.--See Audubon, J. J.


BAILEY, PHILIP JAMES.--Festus: a Poem   London   William Pickering
MDCCCXXXIX. _8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Allo._

First edition, with many portions that were suppressed in the later
editions.


BAILEY, PHILIP JAMES.--Festus a Poem. By Philip James Bailey . . .
Second Edition   London   William Pickering   1845. _Post 8vo, green
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._


BAILLIE, JOANNA.--The Family Legend: a tragedy. By Joanna Baillie.
Edinburgh: Printed by James Ballantyne and Co. for John Ballantyne and
Co. . . . and Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme, . . . 1810. _8vo, Scotch
plaid silk, gilt edges._

First edition. Dedicated to Walter Scott.


BAILLIE, JOANNA.--Dramas, by Joanna Baillie. London: printed for
Longman, . . . 1836. _8vo, three volumes, half orange levant morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Smith-Mansell._


BAINBRIDGE, GEORGE C.--The Fly Fisher's Guide, illustrated by coloured
plates, representing upwards of forty of the most useful Flies,
accurately copied from nature. By Geo. C. Bainbridge Esq . . . Third
Edition. London: Longman &c . . . 1834. _8vo, blue levant morocco, rose
decoration on back and side panels, a rose as central ornament within a
border worked with dotted tools, gilt edges, by David._

Nine plates of fish and flies, all but one coloured.


BAIRD, HENRY M.--History of the Rise of the Huguenots. By Henry M.
Baird, . . . London: Hodder and Stoughton, . . . M DCCCLXXX. _Crown 8vo,
two volumes, half maroon levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


BAKER, REED, AND JONES.--Biographia Dramatica; or, a companion to the
playhouse: containing Historical and critical Memoirs, and original
Anecdotes, of British and Irish Dramatic Writers, from the commencement
of our theatrical exhibitions; among whom are some of the most
celebrated actors: also an alphabetical account, and chronological
lists, of their works, the dates when printed, and observations on their
merits: together with an introductory view of the rise and progress of
the British Stage. Originally compiled, to the year 1764, by David
Erskine Baker. Continued thence to 1782, by Isaac Reed . . . And brought
down to the End of November 1811 . . . by Stephen Jones. London: printed
for Longman . . . 1812. _8vo, four volumes, half green morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._


BAKER, REED, AND JONES.--Biographia Dramatica. 1812. _8vo, four volumes,
russia, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, by Alfred Matthews._

J. Payne Collier's copy, annotated by the Duke of Devonshire with his
own additions and transcriptions from his catalogue of all the notes of
J. P. Kemble.


BALLADS.--A Collection of Old Ballads. Corrected from the best and
most Ancient Copies Extant. With Introductions Historical, Critical,
or Humorous. Illustrated with [41] Copper Plates. . . . London:
Printed for J. Roberts, and D. Leach; and sold by J. Brotherton &c . . .
M DCC XXIII. [-M DCC XXV.] _12mo, three volumes, calf, gilt edges._

Volume I is second edition.


BALLADS.--A Collection of Old Ballads. Corrected from the best and most
Ancient Copies extant. With Introductions Historical and Critical or
Humourous. Illustrated with Copper Plates . . . London . . . MDCCXXIII
(reprint). _8vo, three volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Large paper copy. A reprint of the original edition.


BALLADS.--Popular Ballads and Songs, from Tradition, Manuscripts, and
scarce editions; with translations of similar pieces from the Ancient
Danish Language, and a few originals by the Editor. By Robert Jameeson.
Edinburgh: printed for Archibald Constable and C^{o} . . . 1806. _8vo, two
volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by Matthews._


BALLADS.--A Book of Roxburghe Ballads, edited by John Payne Collier . . .
London: Longman &c . . . 1847. _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back,
side borders, doubled with red morocco, borders, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

John Payne Collier's copy, with India proofs of the woodcuts by
Fairholt, and many manuscript additions and notes.


BALLADS.--The Book of British Ballads . . . Edited by S. C. Hall.
London: Jeremiah How   MDCCCXLVII-IV. _Imperial 8vo, green levant
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by J. Wright._

Both series complete. Illustrated by Ward, Kenny Meadows, Pickersgill,
Tenniel, Corbould, Gilbert, Fairholt, Selous, Paton, Crowquill,
Creswick, Frith, and others.


BALLADS.--English and Scottish Ballads. Edited by Francis James Child.
Boston: Little, Brown, and Company. M.DCCC.LX. _12mo, eight volumes,
calf, gilt top, uncut edges._


BALLADS.--Four Books of Choice Old Scotish Ballads,
M.DCCC.XXIII.--M.DCCC.XLIV. Edinburgh: Reprinted for Private
Circulation. M.DCCC.LXVIII. _Crown 8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait of Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe.

One of one hundred and fifty-five copies printed.


BALLADS.--A Book of Old English Ballads with an Accompaniment of
Decorative Drawings by George Wharton Edwards: And an Introduction by
Hamilton W. Mabie   New York   The Macmillan Company [1896]. _12mo,
buckram, gilt top, uncut edges._


BALLADS OF SCOTLAND.--See Aytoun, W. E.


BALLADS AND SONGS OF LANCASHIRE.--See Harland, John.


BALLANTINE, JAMES.--The Life of David Roberts, R. A. compiled from his
journals and other sources by James Ballantine with etchings and
facsimiles of pen-and-ink sketches by the artist [and portrait]
Edinburgh   Adam and Charles Black, . . . M DCCC LXVI. _4to, cloth, gilt
top, uncut edges._


BALMANNO, MARY.--Pen and Pencil, by M^{rs} Balmanno. New York: D. Appleton
& C^{o}   1858. _4to, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Many of the woodcuts, including the Etruscan Vase, page 212, are by
Anderson.


BALZAC, HONORE.--Balzac's Contes Drolatiques. Droll Stories collected
from the Abbeys of Touraine. Translated [by Henry Van Laun] into
English, complete and unabridged. [vignette] Illustrated with 425
designs By Gustave Dore. London: Chatto and Windus, . . . 1874. _8vo,
cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


BANDELLO, MATTEO.--The Novels of Matteo Bandello Bishop of Agen now
first done into English Prose and Verse by John Payne . . . London: M
DCCC XC: printed for the Villon Society by private subscription and for
private circulation only. _4to, six volumes, vellum boards, gilt top,
uncut edges._

Large paper copy, No. 13.


BANNATYNE CLUB.--The Bannatyne Club. Lists of Members and the Rules,
with a Catalogue of the Books printed for the Bannatyne Club since its
Institution in 1823. Edinburgh: M.DCCC.LXVII. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


BARBAULD, ANNA LAETITIA.--See Richardson, Samuel. Correspondence, 1804.


BARHAM, RICHARD HARRIS DALTON.--The Ingoldsby Legends or Mirth and
Marvels by Thomas Ingoldsby Esquire   London. Richard Bentley. M DCCC
XL. [-M DCCC XLII.-M DCCC XLVII]. _8vo, three volumes, green levant
morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition of the three series, with two portraits, three engraved
titles, and seventeen other plates by Cruikshank and Leech.


BARHAM, RICHARD HARRIS DALTON.--The Life and Remains of Theodore Edward
Hook. By the Rev. R. H. Dalton Barham, . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . .
1849. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, half green levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

First edition. Portraits by G. Cook after Bennett and W. Greatbatch
after E. W. Eddis, and a full-page woodcut.


BARHAM, RICHARD HARRIS DALTON.--The Life and Letters of the Rev. Richard
Harris Barham, author of The Ingoldsby Legends: with a selection from
his Miscellaneous Poems. By his Son. London: Richard Bentley . . . 1870.
_Crown 8vo, two volumes, half red morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Portrait by J. Brown after R. J. Lane.


BARKER, EDMUND HENRY.--Literary Anecdotes and contemporary
reminiscences, of Professor Porson and others: from the manuscript
papers of the late E. H. Barker . . . London: Printed and Published by
J. R. Smith, . . . 1852. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Autograph of the author and numerous plates inserted.


BARLAAM AND JOSAPHAT   English Lives of Buddha   Edited and Induced by
Joseph Jacobs   London. M DCCC XCVI. Published by David Nutt, . . .
_Royal 8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

Frontispiece by H. Ryland in two states, black and bistre. No. 22 of
sixty large paper copies printed.


BARLOW, JOEL.--The Columbiad, a Poem. By Joel Barlow   Printed by Fry
and Kammerer for C. and A. Conrad and C^{o} . . . Philadelphia, 1807.
_4to, red levant morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Portrait and eleven copper-plate engravings by A. Smith, etc., after
Fulton and Smirke, some of the plates in four states, proofs both on
India and plate paper, before and after letters, and in addition
sixteen inserted plates, four being first proofs by W. Blake, portrait
of Louis XVI by Bartolozzi, the Burning of New York, and others of the
series by Barbier, and five portraits of Washington, including that of
Roger after Tardieu.


BARRERE, A.--Argot and Slang   A new French and English dictionary of
the cant words, quaint expressions, slang terms and flash phrases used
in high and low life of old and new Paris by A. Barrere . . . with a
frontis-piece drawn by Godefroy Durand   London   privately printed at
the Chiswick Press by C. Whittingham and Co   1887. _4to, boards, uncut
edges._


BARRY, ALFRED.--The Life and Works of Sir Charles Barry, . . . By Rev.
Alfred Barry, . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1867. . . . _8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

Portrait on steel, and thirty-nine woodcut illustrations.


BARYE, ANTOINE LOUIS.--Catalogue of the Works of Antoine-Louis Barye
exhibited at the American Art Galleries, . . . New York under the
auspices of the Barye Monument Association also of paintings by J. F.
Millet, Th. Rousseau &c . . . his contemporaries and friends for the
benefit of the Barye Monument Fund November 15th, 1889, to January 15th,
1890 . . . [New York, 1890]. _4to, boards, uncut edges._

Limited edition, with portrait after F. Millet and facsimile.


BASILE, GIOVANNI BATTISTA.--Il Pentamerone; or The Tale of Tales. Being
a translation by the late Sir Richard Burton, . . . of Il Pentamerone;
Overo lo Cunto de li Cunte, trattenemiento de li Peccerille, of Giovanni
Battista Basile, Count of Torone (Gian Alessio Abbattutis). . . .
London: Henry and Co., . . . 1893. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

No. 23 of one hundred and sixty-five large paper copies printed.


BATE, HENRY.--The Rival Candidates: a comic opera In Two Acts; as it is
now performing at the Theatre Royal in Drury-Lane. By the Rev. Henry
Bate. London: Printed: Sold by T. Becket, . . . and by W. Griffin, . . .
M,DCC,LXXV. _8vo, morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Dedicated to Mrs. Garrick.


BATTY, ROBERT.--French Scenery from Drawings made in 1819 by Captain
Batty . . . London . . . Rodwell & Martin . . . MDCCCXXII. _Folio, green
morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt edges, by Matthews._

Large paper copy, with the sixty-four plates in two states, engraver's
etchings and finished plates, proofs on India paper before letters.


BATTY, ROBERT.--Scenery of the Rhine, Belgium and Holland, from Drawings
by Capt^{n}. Batty . . . London. Robert Jennings 1826. _Folio, purple
morocco, gilt back and sides (with arms)._

Large paper copy. Sixty large plates and two vignettes engraved by
Goodall, Le Keux, Heath, Finden, J. Landseer, Woolnoth, etc., each plate
in two states, the engraver's etching and finished proof, each on India
paper.

The text is in English and French.


BATTY, ROBERT.--Scenery of the Rhine, Belgium and Holland, 1826. _Folio,
green morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt edges, by Matthews._

Another copy printed on large paper, with the sixty plates and two
vignettes, proofs on India paper in two states, the engraver's etching
and the finished plate before letters.


BATTY, ROBERT.--Select Views of some of the principal Cities of Europe.
From original paintings by Lieut. Col^{l} Batty. F.R.S. With Illustrative
Notices   London: Moon, Boys, and Graves . . . 1832. _Royal folio, red
morocco, back and sides heavily tooled, crest and shield in the centre,
gilt edges._

Large paper copy, with the thirty-five plates each in two states,
unfinished and finished proofs on India paper; an outline plate, with
references to each.


BEAMES, THOMAS.--The Rookeries of London: Past, Present, and
Prospective. By Thomas Beames . . . London: Thomas Bosworth . . .
m.dccc.l. _12mo, half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Woodcut illustrations.


BEARDSLEY, AUBREY.--The Early Work of Aubrey Beardsley with a prefatory
note by H. C. Marillier. John Lane. . . . London and New York. M DCCC
XCIX. _Royal 4to, decorated buckram, gilt top, uncut edges._

One hundred and twenty copies printed on Japanese vellum, with two
portraits and one hundred and fifty-five other illustrations.


BEATTIE, JAMES.--Original Poems and Translations. By James Beattie, A.M.
London: Printed; and sold by A. Millar . . . M DCC LX. _8vo, red levant
morocco, gilt back and sides (original gilt edges), by The Club
Bindery._

First edition. Presentation copy on thick paper, from the author.


BEATTIE, JAMES.--The Minstrel; or, the Progress of Genius: in two books.
With some other poems. By James Beattie . . . London: printed by T.
Gillet, for C. Dilly . . . MDCCXCVII. _Post 8vo, half red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Four plates engraved by Fittler, Neagle, and Heath, after the designs of
Burney.


BEATTIE, JAMES.--The Minstrel: or, the Progress of Genius. With some
other poems. By James Beattie, LL.D. A new edition, to which are
prefixed, Memoirs of the Life of the Author. By Alex. Chalmers, . . .
London: printed for J. Mawman, . . . by T. Bensley, . . . 1806. _12mo,
half orange levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait by J. Heath, and four plates by Heath, Fittler, and Neagle,
after E. F. Burney.


BEATTIE, JAMES.--The Minstrel; or, the Progress of Genius: in two parts.
With Some Other Poems. By James Beattie, LL.D. With designs by Mr.
Thurston: and engraved on wood by Mr. Clennel. Alnwick: Printed by
Catnach and Davison . . . 1807. _4to, light brown levant morocco, gilt
back, side corners, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Large paper copy, with five portraits of Beattie inserted, and numerous
other illustrations by Westall, etc., including proofs in two, three,
and four states.


BEATTIE, JAMES.--The Poetical Works of James Beattie [with a Memoir by
the Rev. Alexander Dyce, and a portrait of Beattie.] London William
Pickering 1831. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


BEATTY, CHARLES.--The Journal of a Two Months Tour; with a view of
Promoting Religion among the Frontier Inhabitants of Pennsylvania, and
of Introducing Christianity among the Indians to the Westward of the
Alegh-geny Mountains. To which are added, Remarks on the Language and
Customs of some particular Tribes among the Indians, with a brief
Account of the various Attempts that have been made to civilize and
convert them, from the first Settlement of New England to this Day; By
Charles Beatty . . . London: Printed for William Davenhill . . . M DCC
LXVIII. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._


BEAUTY: or the Art of Charming. A Poem . . . London: Printed for Lawton
Gilliver . . . MDCCXXXV. _Folio, red levant morocco, by The Club
Bindery. Bound with ten other works._


BEAUTY: or the Art of Charming. 1735. _Folio, red morocco, uncut edges,
by The Club Bindery. Bound with JAMES BRAMSTON'S "Man of Taste," 1733_.

Another copy, uncut.


BECKER, W. A.--Gallus: or Roman Scenes of the Time of Augustus; with
notes and excursuses illustrative of the manners and customs of the
Romans. By Professor W. A. Becker. Translated by the Rev. Frederick
Metcalfe. London: John W. Parker . . . M DCCC XLIV. _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

Two folded plates, coloured.


BECKER, W. A.--Charicles. Illustrations of the Private Life of the
Ancient Greeks with notes and excursuses. From the German of Professor
Becker. A new edition collated and enlarged. London   John W Parker and
Son . . . 1854. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


BECKFORD, WILLIAM.--An Arabian Tale, [Vathek] from an unpublished
manuscript: with Notes critical and explanatory. London: Printed for J.
Johnson, . . . MDCCLXXXVI. _8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by Holloway._

Large paper copy of the first edition in English, with portrait and two
plates inserted, all proofs.

The notes are by Mr. Henley.


BECKFORD, WILLIAM.--Vathek. A Londres: chez Clarke . . . 1815. _8vo,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Cuzin._

Large paper copy, with a vignette "eye and turban" on the title-page,
and three inserted plates by Isaac Taylor, Westall and Heim, proofs on
India paper.

The first English edition in the French language. Originally written in
French, the editions printed in Paris and Lausanne became so scarce that
the author consented to this publication of the first text.


BECKFORD AND JOHNSON.--The History of the Caliph Vathek By William
Beckford, . . . With Preface and Notes, Critical and Explanatory also
Rasselas Prince of Abyssinia By Samuel Johnson, . . . With Four
Etchings and Portrait of Beckford by A. H. Tourrier Etched by Damman.
London   J. C. Nimmo and Bain . . . 1883. _8vo, two works in one volume,
cloth, uncut edges._

No. 71 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with proof
etchings on Japan paper.


BECKFORD, WILLIAM.--Biographical Memoirs of Extraordinary Painters. By
the author of "Vathek" A new Edition. London: Richard Bentley . . .
1834. _12mo, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by C.
Lewis._

Engraved frontispiece.


BECKFORD, WILLIAM.--Italy; with sketches of Spain and Portugal. By the
author of "Vathek." London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1834. _8vo, two
volumes, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


BECKFORD, WILLIAM.--Italy; with sketches of Spain and Portugal. By the
author of "Vathek." Third edition. London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1835.
_8vo, two volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

Presentation copy from the author.


BECKWITH, ARTHUR.--Majolica and Fayence: Italian, Sicilian, Majorcan,
Hispano-Moresque and Persian. By Arthur Beckwith. With photo-engraved
illustrations. New York: D. Appleton and Company, . . . 1877. _12mo,
cloth._


BEDDOES, THOMAS LOVELL.--The Brides' Tragedy. By Thomas Lovell Beddoes
of Pembroke College, Oxford. London: Printed for F. C. & J. Rivington . . .
1822. _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

First edition. A1-A4, and B-K1 in eights, title on A1.


BEDDOES, THOMAS LOVELL.--The Poems posthumous and collected of Thomas
Lovell Beddoes. London   William Pickering   1851. _Small 8vo, two
volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by
David._

A Memoir of one hundred and thirty pages, signed "B," prefaces the first
volume.


BEDFORD, ARTHUR.--The Great Abuse of Musick. In Two Parts. Containing An
Account of the Use and Design of Musick among the Antient Jews, Greeks,
Romans, and others; with their Concern for, and Care to prevent the
Abuse thereof. And also An Account of the Immorality and Profaneness,
which is occasioned by the Corruption of that most Noble Science in the
Present Age. By Arthur Bedford, . . . London: Printed by J. H. for John
Wyatt, . . . 1711. _8vo, blue morocco, gilt back, sides elaborately
tooled in gold, heightened with colours to the "cottage" pattern, gilt
edges, by Mearne._


BELCHER, SIR EDWARD.--The Last of the Arctic Voyages; being a narrative
of the Expedition in H. M. S. Assistance, under the command of Captain
Sir Edward Belcher, C. B., in search of Sir John Franklin, during the
years 1852-53-54. With notes on the natural history, by Sir John
Richardson, Professor Owen, Thomas Bell, J. W. Salter, and Lovell Reeve
. . . . London: Lovell Reeve, . . . 1855. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, half
red morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Four charts, thirty-six plates, many of them coloured, and twenty-five
wood-engravings.


BELL, SIR CHARLES.--The Anatomy and Philosophy of Expression as
connected by the Fine Arts. By Sir Charles Bell . . . Third edition,
enlarged. London: John Murray . . . M.DCCC.XLIV. _Imperial 8vo, half
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Forty-five engravings by Scriven, etc., after the designs of the
author.


BELL, SIR CHARLES.--The Hand its mechanism and vital endowments as
evincing design by Sir Charles Bell K.G.H. . . . [Fourth edition] London
   William Pickering   1837. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Bridgewater Treatise No. 4. Woodcuts.


BELL, THOMAS.--A History of British Quadrupeds, including the Cetacea.
By Thomas Bell, . . . Illustrated by nearly 200 woodcuts. London: John
Van Voorst, . . . M.DCCC.XXXVII. _Imperial 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


BELL, THOMAS.--A History of British Reptiles. By Thomas Bell, . . .
[vignette] Illustrated by more than forty woodcuts. London: John Van
Voorst, . . . M.DCCC.XXXIX. _Imperial 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


BELOE, WILLIAM.--Anecdotes of Literature and Scarce Books. By the Rev.
William Beloe . . . London: printed for F. C. and J. Rivington . . .
1807-'8-'10-'11-'12. _8vo, six volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Pratt._


BELOE, WILLIAM.--The Sexagenarian; or, the Recollections of a Literary
Life . . . Second edition. London: printed for F. C. and J. Rivington . . .
1818. _8vo, two volumes, half russia, uncut edges._

A manuscript key to the characters is inserted.


BENJAMIN, PARK.--See Holmes, O. W. The Harbinger.


BENTLEY BALLADS.--The Bentley Ballads, comprising the Tipperary Hall
Ballads, now first republished from "Bentley's Miscellany," (1846). With
preface and notes biographical and critical by John Sheehan, . . . An
entirely New Edition. London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1869. _Crown 8vo,
half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Pratt._

Frontispiece-title by J. Brown after G. Cruikshank.


BEOWULF.--The Anglo-Saxon Poems of Beowulf the Travellers Song and the
Battle of Finnesburh edited by John M. Kemble . . . [also] a Translation
. . . with a copious Glossary Preface and philological notes by John M.
Kemble . . . London   William Pickering   1835-7. _Foolscap 8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


BERANGER, P. J. DE.--Songs of Beranger translated by the author of the
"Exile of Idria" etc. [J. C. H. Bourne] With a sketch of the Life of
Beranger up to the present time   London   William Pickering   1837.
_Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Presentation copy from the translator to Thomas Campbell.


BERINGTON, JOSEPH.--The History of the Lives of Abeillard and Heloisa;
comprising a period of eighty-four years, From 1079 to 1163. With their
genuine Letters, from the collection of Amboise. . . . By the Rev.
Joseph Berington. Birmingham: printed by M. Swinney; for G. G. J.
Robinson, . . . and R. Faulder, . . . M.DCC.LXXXVII. _4to, calf, gilt
back._


BERRY, MARY.--Extracts from the Journals and Correspondence of Miss
Berry from the year 1783 to 1852. Edited by Lady Theresa Lewis. Second
Edition. London: Longmans, Green, and C^{o} . . . 1866. _8vo, three
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Three frontispiece portraits and a view of the Berry residence, engraved
on steel.


BEST, THOMAS.--A Concise Treatise on the Art of Angling, confirmed by
actual experience, and minute observations. With the proper Methods for
Breeding and Feeding Fish, and of making Fish-Ponds, Stews, &c. with
several Arcana, never before made Public. To which is added The Complete
Fly-Fisher; the Game-Laws relative to Angling: and Prognostics of the
Weather, independent of the Barometer. By Thomas Best. . . . The Fourth
Edition, corrected and improved. London: Printed for B. Crosby . . .
1798. _12mo, half brown levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

Frontispiece engraved by Wooding.


BEST, W. T.--Eighty Chorales Newly Harmonized in Four Parts, with Organ
Accompaniment, by W. T. Best. . . . London: J. Alfred Novello, . . . [n.
d.] _Oblong 4to, cloth._


BEVERLEY, ROBERT.--The History and Present State of Virginia, In Four
Parts. I. The History of the First Settlement of Virginia, and the
Government thereof, to the present Time. II. The Natural Productions
of Conveniences of the Country, suited to Trade and Improvement. III.
The Native Indians, their Religion, Laws, and Customs, in War and
Peace. IV. The present State of the Country, as to the Polity of the
Government, and the Improvements of the Land. _By_ a Native and
Inhabitant of the Place. London: Printed for R. Parker, . . . M DCC V.
_8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, side border, gilt edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition: dedicated to Robert Harley, Speaker of the House of
Commons, and "One of Her Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State."

Frontispiece and fourteen plates by Gribelin, reduced from originals by
De Bry in Hariot's Virginia, and a folded table at the end. Each of the
four parts has separate pagination.


BEVERLEY, ROBERT.--The History of Virginia, In Four Parts. I. The
History of the First Settlement of Virginia, and the Government thereof,
to the Year 1706. II. The natural Productions and Conveniences of the
Country, suited to Trade and Improvement. III. The Native Indians, their
Religion, Laws, and Customs, in War and Peace. IV. The Present State of
the Country, as to the Polity of the Government, and the Improvements of
the Land, the 10th. of June 1720. By a Native and Inhabitant of the
Place. The Second Edition revis'd and enlarg'd by the Author. London:
F. Fayram and J. Clarke . . . and T. Bickerton . . . 1722. _8vo, green
straight-grain morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Frontispiece and fourteen plates by Gribelin, as in the first edition.
The pagination of the four parts is continuous.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A General History of Quadrupeds. The figures engraved
on wood by T. Bewick, [wood cut]   Newcastle upon Tyne: printed by and
for S. Hodgson, B. Beilby, & T. Bewick . . . 1790. _8vo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

First edition. One hundred and eighty-six cuts of animals and numerous
tail-pieces. Four hundred and fifty-six pages, the last two leaves
Addenda, "The American Elk," with cut, and "Wild Cattle," with
tail-piece.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A General History of Quadrupeds. 1790. _Royal 8vo,
citron levant morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy, printed on large paper, and formerly owned by Marmaduke
Tunstall, who commissioned Bewick to make the famous woodcut of the
Chillingham Bull. Tunstall has pencilled notes on several pages.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A General History of Quadrupeds. The figures engraved
on wood by T. Bewick. The second edition. [cut] Newcastle upon Tyne:
printed by and for S. Hodgson, R. Beilby, & T. Bewick, . . . 1791.
[Price nine shillings in boards.] _8vo, light brown levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Thick paper copy. 483 pages instead of 456, as in the first edition, and
no Addenda. "The American Elk" in the Addenda of the first edition is
incorporated in the text, and "Wild Cattle" is omitted. Fourteen
varieties of Bat are added, with three cuts, and two tail-pieces, the
second the same as the last of the first edition.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A General History of Quadrupeds. The figures engraved
on wood by T. Bewick. The third edition. [cut] Newcastle upon Tyne:
printed by and for S. Hodgson, R. Beilby, & T. Bewick. . . . 1792. . . .
_8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A general History of Quadrupeds. The figures engraved
on wood by T. Bewick. The fourth edition. Newcastle upon Tyne: printed
by and for S. Hodgson, R. Beilby, and T. Bewick, . . . 1800. Price
15_s._ _Royal 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt
top, uncut edges, by L. Broga._

Large paper copy.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A General History of Quadrupeds. The figures engraved
on wood by Thomas Bewick. The fifth edition. Newcastle-upon-Tyne:
printed by Edward Walker . . . 1807. _Imperial 8vo, green levant
morocco, gilt back and side panels after the manner of Roger Payne, gilt
edges, by Bedford._

Imperial paper copy with the following plates inserted: A print from the
last work of Bewick, the unfinished block "Waiting for Death," with the
original wrapper and printed description, the large print of Kyloe Ox,
unique impressions of the Chillingham Bull cut on India paper and three
other states, portrait of Bewick by Meyer after Ramsay, facsimile letter
and a drawing.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A General History of Quadrupeds. 1807. _Imperial 8vo,
half russia, uncut edges._

Another copy on largest and thick paper.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A General History of Quadrupeds. The figures engraved
on wood by Thomas Bewick. The seventh edition. Newcastle upon Tyne:
printed by Edw. Walker, for T. Bewick . . . 1820. _4to, red levant
morocco, Janseniste, gilt over uncut edges, by Marius Michel._

Large paper copy, with portrait of Bewick, proof on India paper before
letters.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--(I.) History of British Birds. The figures engraved on
wood by T. Bewick. Vol. I. containing the History and Description of
Land Birds. [cut] Newcastle: printed by Sol. Hodgson, for Beilby &
Bewick:. . . [Price 13_s._ in Boards.] 1797. (II.) History of British
Birds. The figures engraved on wood by T. Bewick. Vol. II. containing
the History and Description of Water Birds. [cut] Newcastle: printed by
Edward Walker, for T. Bewick: . . . [Price 15_s._ in Boards.] 1804.
_8vo, two volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._

First issue of the first edition, with the misprint above the date,
"13_s_ in Boards" instead of "15_s_" as in Volume II. The last page of
Volume I contains an advertisement of the third edition of "A General
History of Quadrupeds," 1792, "Lately was published," etc. In some
issues of this edition the last page is blank, in some the fourth
edition of "Quadrupeds" is advertised.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--History of British Birds. 1797-1804. _Royal 8vo, two
volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
David._

Another copy of the first issue, printed on large and thick paper, with
inserted portrait of Bewick by Summerfield after Murphy.

Bound at the end of Volume II is the Supplement, 1821, also printed on
large and thick paper.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--History of British Birds. 1797-1804. _8vo, two volumes,
green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Second issue of the first edition, printed upon thick paper. The
misprint "13_s_" above the date is corrected to "15_s_," and Volume II
is priced 18_s_. The last page of Volume I contains an advertisement of
the fourth edition of "A General History of Quadrupeds," 1800, "In the
Press, and speedily will be published," etc.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A History of British Birds. The figures engraved on
wood by T. Bewick . . . containing the History and Description of Land
[and Water] Birds Newcastle . . . Edward Walker . . . 1805. _Royal 8vo,
two volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back and side panels in the
manner of Roger Payne, gilt edges with many rough leaves, by Bedford._

Large paper copy of the second edition, with inserted portrait engraved
by T. Ranson after a painting by W. Nicholson.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A History of British Birds. 1805. _Imperial 8vo, two
volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, side corners, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._

Another copy, uncut, printed upon largest paper.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A Supplement to the History of British Birds. The
figures engraved on wood by T. Bewick. Part I. containing the history
and description of land birds. [Part II. containing the history and
description of water birds.] [cut] Newcastle: printed by Edward Walker,
. . . for T. Bewick . . . 1821. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Thick paper copy of the first edition, with final leaf of advertisement
of "History of Quadrupeds" and "Fables of AEsop."


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A Supplement to the History of British Birds. 1821.
_8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Another copy, printed upon somewhat thinner paper.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--A Supplement to the History of British Birds. 1821.
_Royal 8vo, bound with Volume II of "British Birds," on page 47._

Another copy, printed upon large paper.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--Select Fables: with cuts, designed and engraved by
Thomas and John Bewick, and others, previous to the year 1784: together
with a Memoir; and a descriptive Catalogue of the Works of Messrs.
Bewick. Newcastle: printed by S. Hodgson . . . M.DCCC.XX. _Royal 8vo,
red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Matthews._

Large paper copy, with a portrait of Thomas Bewick, proof on India
paper.


BEWICK, THOMAS.--Select Fables; 1820. _Imperial 8vo, green levant
morocco, gilt back and side panels in the manner of Roger Payne, gilt
edges, by Bedford._

Another copy, printed upon largest paper, with proof portrait of Bewick
added.


BEWICK, WILLIAM.--See Landseer, Thomas.


BIBLIOGRAPHICA   Volume I   [23 plates] London: Kegan Paul, Trench,
Truebner & Co. . . . 1895. _Imperial 8vo, four parts, paper, uncut
edges._


BICKERDYKE, JOHN.--The Book of the All-Round Angler. A comprehensive
treatise on angling in both fresh and salt water. By John Bickerdyke.
With over 150 engravings. London: L. Upcott Gill . . . 1888. _8vo, half
brown Roxburghe morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, two hundred and one printed.


BICKERSTAFFE, ISAAC.--The Romp. A musical entertainment in two acts.
Altered from Love in the City, By Mr. Bickerstaff. As it has been acted
at The Theatres Royal in Dublin and York, and now performed at the
Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. London: Printed for W. Lowndes, . . . and
J. Barker, . . . 1786. [Price One Shilling.] _8vo, half blue levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition. A-D in fours, title on A1. Portrait of Dora Jordan in the
character of Priscilla Tomboy, engraved by Angus after a drawing from
life by Stothard.

"Love in a City" was printed in 8vo, 1767.


BIERSTADT, OSCAR A.--The Library of Robert Hoe   a contribution to the
history of Bibliophilism in America by O. A. Bierstadt . . . with one
hundred and ten illustrations taken from manuscripts in the collection.
New York   Duprat & Co, . . . 1895. _8vo, citron levant morocco, back
and sides elaborately tooled in fleurs-de-lys ornaments, etc., gilt top,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

No. 322 of three hundred and fifty copies printed on Japan paper. Extra
plates and facsimiles added.


BIERSTADT, OSCAR A.--The Library of Robert Hoe. 1895. _8vo, green levant
morocco, back and sides richly tooled, an original design with monogram,
doubled with red morocco, floral border, gilt top, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

Another copy. No. 100 of three hundred and fifty printed on Japan paper.


BIGELOW, JOHN.--Some Recollections of the late Edouard Laboulaye by John
Bigelow   Privately printed   [New York, 1889]. _16mo, cloth, uncut
edges._

Presentation copy from the author.


BIJOU.--The Bijou; or Annual of Literature and the Arts. London
William Pickering, . . . 1828--MDCCCXXIX   MDCCCXXX. _Post 8vo, three
volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

Proof copies, with the plates on India paper. See CAMEO.


BINNS, R. W.--A Century of Potting in the City of Worcester   being the
history of the Royal Porcelain Works, from 1751 to 1851, to which is
added   A short account of the Celtic, Roman, and Mediaeval Pottery of
Worcester. By R. W. Binns, . . . second edition. Illustrated. London:
Bernard Quaritch, . . . MDCCCLXXVII. _8vo, half olive morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._


BINNY, JOHN.--See Mayhew and Binny.


BIOGRAPHICAL MIRROR.--The Biographical Mirrour, comprising a series of
ancient and modern English Portraits, of eminent and distinguished
persons, from original pictures and drawings. [vignette] London:
Published by S. and E. Harding, . . . 1795-98. _4to, three volumes in
one, half russia, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

One hundred and fifty-one portraits. Volume III was printed for
Silvester Harding, n. d.


BIRCH, JONATHAN.--Fifty-One Original Fables, with Morals and Ethical
Index, written by J. C. [Job Crithannoh, anagram of Jonathan Birch]
Embellished with eighty-five Original designs by R. Cruikshank, engraved
on wood by Slader, D. Dodd, S. Williams, Bonner, and others. Also a
Translation of Plutarch's Banquet of the Seven Ages, revised for this
work   London: printed for Hamilton, Adams and C^{o}. . . . M.DCCC.XXXIII.
_8vo, blue levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by Louise Reymann._


BIRCH, SAMUEL.--History of Ancient Pottery. By Samuel Birch . . .
Egyptian, Assyrian, and Greek [Etruscan and Roman]   Illustrated with
coloured plates [12] and numerous engravings [207]   London: John Murray
. . . 1858. _8vo, two volumes, cloth._

Autograph letter of the author inserted.


BIRCH, SAMUEL.--History of Ancient Pottery, Egyptian, Assyrian, Greek,
Etruscan, and Roman. By Samuel Birch, . . . new and revised edition.
With coloured plates and woodcuts. London: John Murray, . . . 1873.
_8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


BIRCH, WALTER DE GRAY.--The History, Art and Palaeography of the
manuscript styled the Utrecht Psalter: by Walter de Gray Birch, . . . [3
folded plates]   London: Samuel Bagster and Sons, . . . M.DCCC.LXXVI.
_8vo, cloth._


BIRDWOOD, GEORGE C M.--The Industrial Arts of India. By George C. M.
Birdwood, . . . with maps and woodcuts. . . . Published for the
Committee of Council on Education by Chapman and Hall, . . . [1880].
_Post 8vo, two volumes in one, cloth, uncut edges._


BIRRELL, AUGUSTINE.--Life of Charlotte Bronte by Augustine Birrell
London   Walter Scott . . . 1887. _Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._


BLACK, CHARLES CHRISTOPHER.--. . . Michael Angelo Buonarroti   Sculptor,
Painter, Architect   the Story of his Life and Labours by Charles
Christopher Black, . . . [20 plates] London   Macmillan and Co.   1875.
_Royal 8vo, decorated cloth, gilt edges._


BLACKBURN, CHARLES F.--Rambles in Books by Charles F. Blackburn
[portrait] . . . London: Sampson Low Marston & Company . . . M DCCC
XCIII. _Post 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 282 of five hundred copies printed.


BLACKER, WILLIAM.--Blacker's Art of Fly Making, &c, comprising Angling &
Dyeing of Colours, with engravings of Salmon & Trout Flies, shewing the
process of the gentle craft as taught in the pages. With Descriptions of
Flies for the Season of the Year as they come out on the water.
Rewritten and revised by the author Blacker, himself, fishing tackle
maker of 54 Dean St. Soho, London 1855. _18mo, green levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Trioullier._

Frontispiece, engraved title, seventeen coloured plates of artificial
flies, and three plates of tackle.


BLACKIE, JOHN STUART.--On Self-Culture. Intellectual, Physical, and
Moral . . . by John Stuart Blackie . . . Second edition. Edinburgh
Edmonston and Douglas   1874. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


BLACKIE, JOHN STUART.--Life of Robert Burns by John Stuart Blackie
London   Walter Scott . . . 1888. _Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._


BLACKMORE, RICHARD D.--Lorna Doone: A Romance of Exmoor. By R. D.
Blackmore, . . . London: Sampson Low, Son, & Marston, . . . 1869. . . .
_Crown 8vo, three volumes, blue cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Blackmore's own copy.


BLADEN, MARTIN.--Solon: or, Philosophy No Defence against Love. A
tragi-comedy. With the Masque of Orpheus and Euridice. Written by
Captain Martin Bladen. . . . London: Printed for R. Smith, . . . and
sold by J. Nutt . . . 1705. . . . _4to, blue morocco, gilt edges, by
The Club Bindery._

Never acted, and printed without the author's knowledge.


BLADES, WILLIAM.--The Life and Typography of William Caxton, England's
first printer, with evidence of his typographical connection with Colard
Mansion, the printer at Bruges. Compiled from original sources by
William Blades. Published by Joseph Lilly . . . London 1861 [-1863].
_4to, two volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Bedford._

Fifty-seven plates, specimens of Caxton's types, etc.


BLADES, WILLIAM.--The Life and Typography of William Caxton. 1861-63.
_4to, two volumes, half morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Another copy, with portrait and fifty-nine facsimile plates on India
paper.


BLADES, WILLIAM.--A List of Medals, Jettons, Tokens, &c. in connection
with Printers and the Art of Printing by William Blades. London. 1869.
_Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Ninety-three plates, including three double ones.

One of one hundred copies printed. Presentation copy from the author.


BLADES, WILLIAM.--How to tell a Caxton with some hints where and how the
same might be found. By William Blades, . . . [16 plates]   London:
Henry Sotheran & Co., . . . 1870. _Foolscap 8vo, boards, uncut edges._


BLADES, WILLIAM.--The Enemies of Books. By William Blades, Typograph. . . .
Truebner & Co., . . . 1880. _Post 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt
back, side corners, centre ornaments, gilt over uncut edges, by
Katherine Adams._

Frontispiece portrait of John Bagford and six other plates.


BLADES, WILLIAM.--The Pentateuch of Printing, with a Chapter on Judges.
By William Blades. With a Memoir of the Author, and List of his Works,
by Talbot B. Reed.   [59 illustrations]   London: Elliot Stock, . . .
1891. _4to, half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


BLAIR, ROBERT.--The Grave, a poem. By Robert Blair. Illustrated by
Twelve Etchings executed [by Louis Schiavonetti] from Original Designs,
[by William Blake]   London: printed by T. Bensley, . . . 1808. _Folio,
brown levant morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Proof copy of the first edition, most of which was printed in quarto.
Besides the twelve designs are a portrait on India paper after T.
Phillips, and an engraved title.


BLAIR, ROBERT.--The Grave, a poem. By Robert Blair. Illustrated by
Twelve Etchings [by Lewis Schiavonetti] executed from original designs,
[by William Blake]   To which is added a Life of the Author. [also
Biographical Sketches of Schiavonneti and Robert Hartley Cromek.]
London: printed by T. Bensley, . . . for the proprietor, R. Ackermann,
. . . &c . . . 1813. _Royal 4to, half brown levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Portrait by Schiavonetti after T. Phillips.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--Songs of Innocence   1789   The Author & Printer W
Blake   _Post 8vo, light brown levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back,
side borders in floral mosaic design of citron, blue and green morocco
on a red ground, doubled with red morocco, corner ornaments in floral
mosaic, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Coloured by Blake and presented by him to his physician.

The plates are arranged as follows, by pages:

Page 1. Blank. 2. Frontispiece of Piper. 3. Title of "Songs of
Innocence," as above. 4. Blank. 5. Introduction, "Piping down the
valleys wild," etc. 6. Blank. 7. The Shepherd. 8. Infant Joy. 9-10.
Cradle Song. 11. Laughing Song. 12-13. The Little Black Boy. 14. The
Voice of the Ancient Bard. 15-16. The Ecchoing Green. 17. Nurses Song,
"When the voices of children are heard on the green, And laughing is
heard on the hill." 18. Holy Thursday, "'T was on a Holy Thursday." 19.
On Anothers Sorrow. 20-21. Spring. 22. The School Boy. 23. A Dream.
24-25. The Little Girl Lost, "In Futurity I prophetic see." 25-26. The
Little Girl Found, "All the night in woe." 27. The Blossom. 28. The
Lamb. 29. The Little Boy lost. 30. The Little Boy found. 31-32. Night.
33. The Chimney Sweeper, "When my mother died," etc. 34. The Divine
Image.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--Songs of Innocence. 1789. _Post 8vo, original calf,
gilt back, side borders, centre ornaments._

Another copy, also coloured by Blake, and more delicately than the
preceding, pale green and blue predominating.

The plates are the same as in the preceding copy. On the basis of the
numbers in that copy, their arrangement is as follows: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 12-13, 14, 9-10, 27, 24-25, 25-26, 28, 17, 8, 19, 29, 30, 33, 20-21,
22, 11, 23, 18, 34, 15-16, 31-32.

John Linnell's copy.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--The Marriage of Heaven and Hell. [1790] _Royal 8vo,
Spanish calf, gilt back, side borders._

The arrangement is as follows, by pages:--

1. Title-page. 2. Blank. 3. The Argument. 4. Blank. 5. "As a new heaven
is begun," with two drawings. 6. The voice of the Devil, with one
drawing. 7-8. "Those who restrain desire," with one drawing. 8-9. A
Memorable Fancy, "As I was walking among the fires of hell." 9-12.
Proverbs of Hell, one drawing. 13. "The ancient Poets," etc., two
drawings. 14-15. A Memorable Fancy, "The Prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel."
16. "The ancient tradition," etc., one drawing. 17. A Memorable Fancy,
"I was in a Printing house in Hell," one drawing. 18-19. "The Giants who
formed this world," one drawing. 19-22. A Memorable Fancy, "An Angel
came to me," one drawing. 23-24. "I have always found," etc., one
drawing. 24-26. A Memorable Fancy, "Once I saw a Devil," one drawing.
27-29. A Song of Liberty. 30. Blank.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--The Marriage of Heaven and Hell. _4to, half morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges._

One hundred copies reproduced from the original in the collection of
Lord Houghton.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--Songs of Experience   1794   The Author & Printer W
Blake. _Post 8vo, maroon straight-grain morocco, gilt back, side panels,
corner ornaments, gilt edges._

The plates are arranged as follows, by leaves, the versos being blank:

1. Title-page. 2. Introduction. 3. Earth's Answer. 4. The Clod & the
Pebble. 5. The Chimney Sweeper, "A little black thing among the snow."
6. A Poison Tree. 7. Infant Sorrow. 8. The Tyger. 9. The Fly. 10. The
Sick Rose. 11. The Human Abstract. 12. A Little Girl Lost, "Children of
the Future Age." 13-14. The Little Girl Lost, "In futurity I prophetic
see" [found also in both copies of "Songs of Innocence"]. 14-15. The
Little Girl Found, "All the night in woe" [found in "Songs of
Innocence"]. 16. The Garden of Love. 17. The Angel. 18. My Pretty Rose
Tree, Ah! Sunflower, and The Lilly. 19. A Little Boy Lost, "Nought loves
another as itself." 20. To Tirzah. 21. London. 22. The Little Vagabond.
23. Holy Thursday, "Is this a holy thing to see." 24. Nurses Song, "when
the voices of children are heard on the green, And whisperings are in
the dale" [a different version from that in "Songs of Innocence"]. 25.
The School Boy, "I love to rise in a summer morn."


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--Songs of Innocence and Songs of Experience   by William
Blake   London: R. Brimley Johnson. Guildford: A. C. Curtis. M DCCC I.
_Square 16mo, red levant morocco, side border of mosaic in green and
blue morocco, doubled with red morocco, wide floral borders of gilt and
green mosaic, the intervals filled with dots, vellum guards, gauffred
gilt top, uncut edges, by the Guild of Women-Binders._

Aquatint frontispiece after Blake.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--Songs of Innocence and Experience with other poems   By
W Blake   London   Basil Montagu Pickering . . . 1866   _Foolscap 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First issue, printed without the name of the Editor, Richard Herne
Shepherd. Fifty copies were printed containing the cancelled lines on
pages 89 and 100, where the asterisks occur in this copy.

"Long John Brown and Little Mary Bell" is here printed for the first
time. It was omitted in the Appendix to Gilchrist's "Life of Blake," for
the reasons stated there.

The present copy was the Editor's, and contains the substance of the
preceding notes, in his handwriting.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--Milton, a Poem in 12 Books. The Author & Printer W.
Blake   1804. To Justify the Ways of God to Men. _4to, original calf
binding._

Forty-five pages, ten being entirely illustration, thirteen partly so,
and the rest in script text with background in many colours.

In all probability the best of three copies of this book known to exist,
though it is said that Blake made twelve copies in all. The other known
copies are in the British Museum and Lenox Library. Mr. Muir, who
reproduced the copy in the British Museum, places this example as better
than either of the others, the scheme of colour being more perfect.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--Illustrations of The Book of Job   Invented & Engraved
by William Blake   1825   London   Published . . . March 8: 1825, by
William Blake. . . . _Folio, half red morocco, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Large paper copy. Engraved title and twenty-one proof plates on India
paper.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--Poetical Sketches   By William Blake now first
reprinted from the original edition of 1783   edited and prefaced by
Richard Herne Shepherd   London   Basil Montagu Pickering . . . 1868.
_Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--The Poems of William Blake   comprising Songs of
Innocence and of Experience together with poetical sketches and some
copyright poems not in any other edition   London   Basil Montagu
Pickering . . . 1874. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--Volume I. (I.) Number 31   Songs of Innocence. W. Blake
   1789 [rep. 1885] (II.) Number 6. Songs of Experience. W^{m} Blake   1794
[rep. 1885] (III.) Number 33. The Book of Thel. W^{m} Blake   1789 [rep.
1885] (IV.) Number 35. Visions of the Daughters of Albion. W Blake
1793 [repr. 1885] (V.) Number 12. The Marriage of Heaven and Hell.
Will^{m} Blake. 1790 [rep. 1885]

Volume II. (I.) Copy No. 15. Milton, a poem in 2 books, By Wm. Blake,
1804, facsimiled at Edmonton, anno 1886, By Wm. Muir, J. D. Watts, H. T.
Muir, and E. Druitt. For whom Bernard Quaritch, . . . is agent. (II.)
No. 2. The Gates of Paradise, by Wm. Blake, Lambeth, 1793. Facsimiled at
Edmonton, anno 1888, By Mary Hughes and Wm. Muir. Bernard Quaritch, . . .
(III.) No. 5. The First Book of Urizen, by Wm. Blake, Lambeth, 1794.
Facsimiled at Edmonton in 1888 by Wm. Muir, H. T. Muir, J. D. Watts, and
A. F. Westcott, from the splendid original belonging to Mr. Macgeorge,
of Glasgow. . . . Blake calls this the "First" Book, but he composed no
Second. . . . Bernard Quaritch, . . . (IV.) Copy No. 1. There is no
Natural Religion. By Wm. Blake. Facsimilied at Edmonton Anno 1886 by Wm.
Muir, E. Druitt, H. T. Muir, and J. D. Watts. . . . _4to, two volumes,
half green straight-grain morocco, uncut edges, with the original covers
bound in, by The Club Bindery._


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--Facsimile of what is believed to be the last replica of
The Songs of Innocence and of Experience executed by William Blake
With an Introduction   By Edwin J. Ellis . . . London   Bernard
Quaritch, . . . 1893. _Royal 4to, half brown morocco, uncut edges._

No. 28 of fifty copies in water-colours, on printed outlines, touched
with gold, in exact imitation of Blake's own work.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--The Poems of William Blake edited by W. B. Yeats.
London: Laurence & Bullen, . . . 1893. _Post 8vo, half vellum, gilt top,
uncut edges._

Portrait. No. 53 of two hundred copies printed on large paper.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--Selections from the Writings of William Blake with an
introductory essay by Laurence Housman   London   C. Kegan Paul, Trench,
Truebner & Co. Ltd.   MDCCCXCIII. _Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut
edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with a frontispiece.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--[Illustrations to Dante's "Inferno."] _Oblong 4to, half
cloth, gilt top._

Seven plates on India paper.


BLAKE, WILLIAM.--See Blair, Robert.


BLAKEY, ROBERT, _editor_.--The Angler's Song Book. Compiled and Edited
by Robert Blakey . . . London: George Cox . . . 1855. _8vo, green
morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt edges, by Matthews._

Presentation copy from the author to Octave Delepierre. Printed on paper
of various colours and tints.


BLAKEY, ROBERT.--Historical Sketches of the Angling Literature of all
Nations. By Robert Blakey . . . to which is added A Bibliography of
English Writers on Angling   London: John Russell Smith . . . MDCCCLVI.
_12mo, calf, gilt and inlaid back, gilt edges._


BLEECKER AND FAUGERES.--The Posthumous Works of Ann Eliza Bleecker, in
prose and verse. To which is added, A Collection of Essays, prose and
poetical, by Margaretta V. Faugeres. New York: Printed by T. and J.
Swords . . . 1793. _12mo, red calf, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by
Pratt._

Portrait by Tiebout.


BLENNERHASSETT, LADY.--Madame de Stael   her friends, and her influence
in politics and literature. By Lady Blennerhassett. With a portrait of
Madame de Stael. . . . London: Chapman and Hall . . . 1889. _8vo, three
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

A slightly abridged translation by J. E. Gordon Cumming.


"BLINKINSOP, VICESIMUS."--See Hook, Theodore.


BLOEMART, ABRAHAM.--Twenty-five Etchings by Abraham Bloemart, original
impressions, depicting Beggars, Soldiers, &c. _12mo, red morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Stikeman._


BLOODGOOD, S. DEWITT.--The Sexagenary: or, Reminiscences of the American
Revolution. . . . Albany, . . . J. Munsell, . . . 1866. _8vo, half blue
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

One of fifty copies printed upon large paper, with three inserted
portraits.


BLOOMFIELD, ROBERT.--(I.) The Farmer's Boy; a rural poem. By Robert
Bloomfield. . . . [vignette] London: printed for Vernor and Hood, . . .
by T. Bensley, . . . MDCCC. (II.) Rural Tales, Ballads, and Songs: By
Robert Bloomfield, . . . London: printed for Vernor and Hood, . . . and
Longman and Rees, . . . By T. Bensley, . . . 1802. _4to, two works in
one volume, green levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by
Bedford._

First editions. In addition to the woodcuts by Bewick, over one hundred
engravings have been inserted, including nine portraits of the author,
also forty-five views and sixty miniature vignettes, for the greater
part proofs on India paper.


BLOOMFIELD, ROBERT.--The Farmer's Boy. 1800. _4to, green levant morocco,
gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy, with the title on India paper.


BLOOMFIELD, ROBERT.--The Farmer's Boy; a rural poem. By Robert
Bloomfield. The fourteenth edition. London: printed for Longman . . .
1820. _12mo, half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Nine woodcut illustrations by Bewick.


BLOOMFIELD, ROBERT.--May Day with the Muses. By Robert Bloomfield, . . .
[vignette] London: printed for the author; and for Baldwin, Cradock, and
Joy. 1822. _12mo, boards, uncut edges._

Eight woodcut vignettes.


BLOOMFIELD, ROBERT.--Poems by Robert Bloomfield, the Farmer's Boy. With
thirteen illustrations, designed and drawn by T. Sidney Cooper, J.
Callcott Horsley, J. Frederick Tayler, and Thomas Webster, . . .
engraved by Thurston Thompson. London: John Van Voorst, . . . M DCCC
XLV. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


BLUNDERELLA: or, the Impertinent. A tale. . . . To which is Added The
Beau Monde, or, the Pleasures of St. James's. A new ballad. To the
Tune of, Oh! London, is a fine Town, &c. London: Printed for A. Dodd, . . .
M DCCXXX. _Folio, cloth, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


BLUNT, WILFRID SCAWEN.--The Love Songs of Proteus with frontispiece by
the author. London C. Kegan Paul & Co. . . . MDCCCLXXXI. _Foolscap 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


BLUNT, WILFRID SCAWEN.--The Love Lyrics & Songs of Proteus by Wilfrid
Scawen Blunt, with the Love Sonnets of Proteus by the same author. Now
reprinted in their full text with many Sonnets omitted from the earlier
editions   [Reeves & Turner]   London   MDCCCXCII. _Small 4to, parchment
covers, uncut edges._

Three hundred copies printed by William Morris at the Kelmscott Press.


BLUNT, WILFRID SCAWEN.--In Vinculis. By Wilfrid Scawen Blunt. London
Kegan Paul, Trench & Co. . . . MDCCCLXXXIX. _Crown 8vo, original covers,
uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with etched portrait of the author,
Japan proof.


BOADEN, FORSTER, AND OTHERS.--(I.) An Inquiry into the Authenticity of
various Pictures and Prints, which, from the decease of the poet to our
own times, have been offered to the public as Portraits of Shakspeare:
containing a careful examination of the evidence on which they claim to
be received; by which the pretended portraits have been rejected, the
genuine confirmed and established. Illustrated by accurate and finished
engravings, by the ablest artists, from such originals as were of
indisputable authority. By James Boaden, . . . London: printed for
Robert Triphook, . . . 1824. (II.) A Few Remarks by Henry Rumsey Forster
on the Chandos portrait of Shakspeare, recently purchased at Stowe, for
the Right Hon. The Earl of Ellesmere. And a letter upon the Same, by H.
Rodd. London: [No. 28 of] fifty copies printed for private distribution,
1849. (III.) On the Principal Portraits of Shakspeare. (From "Notes &
Queries," April 23, 1864). By George Scharf. (IV.) An Inquiry into the
History, Authenticity, and Characteristics of the _Shakspere_ Portraits;
the death mask   Martin Droeshout's engraving, the Chandos picture, the
Janssen, and others of that period; together with the Stratford
monument, Roubiliac's, and the one in Westminster Abbey. _Royal 4to,
four works in one volume (the last three inlaid to 4to), half red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bradstreet's._

Large paper copy. Besides the seven portraits published with the first
work, there are inserted five views, one facsimile, and ten other
portraits, including those engraved by R. Cooper, Neagle, Scriven, J.
Cochran, Lud. Du Guernier, W: Sharp, and W. Holl.

The second and fourth works contain woodcuts.


BOADEN, JAMES.--The Life of Mrs. Jordan; including original private
correspondence, and numerous anecdotes of her contemporaries. By James
Boaden . . . London: Edward Bull . . . 1831. _8vo, two volumes, boards,
uncut edges._

First edition. Portrait of Mrs. Jordan by Worthington after Romney,
another (inserted) in the character of the Country Girl, and a
facsimile.


BOCCACCIO, GIOVANNI.--The Decameron; or, ten days entertainment of
Boccaccio. Translated from the Italian. To which are prefixed, Remarks
on the life and writings of Boccaccio; and an advertisement, By the
Author of Old Nick [Edward Dubois] . . . London: printed for . . . all
Booksellers. 1845. _8vo, calf, gilt back, citron edges, by Bedford._

Portrait and ten plates by Stothard inserted.


BOCCACCIO, GIOVANNI.--The Decameron or Ten Days' Entertainment of
Boccaccio. A revised translation, by W. K. Kelly. London: Henry G. Bohn
. . . M DCCC LV. _Post 8vo, half blue morocco, uncut edges._

Portrait of Boccaccio by Hinchliff after Van Dalen.


BOCCACCIO, GIOVANNI.--The Decameron of Giovanni Boccacci (Il Boccaccio)
now first completely done into English Prose and Verse by John Payne . . .
London: M DCCC LXXXVI: printed for the Villon Society by private
subscription and for private circulation only, _4to, three volumes,
vellum boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, No. 23.


BOCCACCIO, GIOVANNI.--A translation of Giovanni Boccaccio's Life of
Dante with an introduction and a note on the portraits of Dante by G. R.
Carpenter. The Grolier Club of the City of New York   MDCCCC. _8vo,
original boards, uncut edges._

Three hundred copies printed, with portrait of Dante, and folded plate
of Florence.


BOCCACCIO, GIOVANNI.--A translation of Giovanni Boccaccio's Life of
Dante. 1900. _8vo, brown levant morocco, rich gilt back and side
borders, doubled with vellum, gilt borders, vellum guards, gilt over
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy. One of three printed upon vellum.


BOHN, HENRY G.--The Biography and Bibliography of Shakespeare. By Henry
G. Bohn. [1863] _4to, red levant morocco, doubled with russia, russia
guards, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Nineteen plates. Published by the Philobiblon Society, and dedicated to
its members. The author's own copy.


BOHN, HENRY G.--The Biography and Bibliography of Shakespeare. [1863]
_Small 4to, red levant morocco, back and sides blind tooled, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Alfred Matthews._

Another copy.


BOHN, HENRY G., _editor_.--A Dictionary of Quotations from the English
Poets. By Henry G. Bohn, . . . London: printed for private distribution.
1867. _4to, red levant morocco, doubled with russia, russia guards, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._


BOOKBINDING.--A Collection of Facsimiles from examples of historic or
artistic bookbinding, illustrating the history of binding as a branch of
the decorative arts. [111 coloured plates] London: Bernard Quaritch, . . .
1889. _Royal 8vo, half red straight-grain morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, with the original covers bound in, by Stikeman._


BOOKBINDING.--Catalogue raisonnee   Works on Bookbinding practical and
historical   Examples of Bookbindings of the XVIth to XIXth centuries
from the collection of Samuel Putnam Avery, A. M.   exhibited at
Columbia University Library M DCCCC III [Compiled by Charles Alexander
Nelson]   Privately printed   [at the De Vinne Press] New York   [1903].
_12mo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Frontispiece on Japan paper from a water-colour drawing and autograph
note by Maurice Leloir.

One of one hundred copies printed for Mr. Avery, with Addenda and
frontispiece not in the first edition. Presentation copy.


BOOK OF FUN.--The Book of Fun. London   J. Gilbert. _12mo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

This volume comprises: "The Illustrated English Grammar; or, Lindley
Murray Simplified"; "The Comic Speaker"; "Illustrated Arithmetic; or,
Cyphering made Comical"; and "The Comic History of Rome." Lithographic
title-page, numerous woodcut illustrations, and the original cloth
covers.


BOOK OF GEMS.--The Book of Gems. The Poets and Artists of Great Britain.
Edited by S. C. Hall. London: Saunders and Otley . . . 1836-'7-'8.
_8vo, three volumes, calf, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Riviere._

First edition. One hundred and forty-nine vignette illustrations
engraved on steel by Finden, Greatbach, Goodall, Cousins, etc., after
the designs of Mulready, Eastlake, Lawrence, Etty, Prout, Beechey,
Stanfield, Wilkie, Reynolds, Maclise, Turner, Stothard, Flaxman, Leslie,
Constable, Gainsborough, Landseer, and others.


BOOSEY, THOMAS.--Piscatorial Reminiscences and Gleanings by an Old
Angler and Bibliopolist [T. Boosey]. To which is added a Catalogue of
Books on Angling [by William Pickering]   London   William Pickering
1835. _16mo, cloth, uncut edges._

Frontispiece. The Catalogue of Books on Angling has a separate title,
dated 1836.


BOOTH, EDWIN.--Excerpts from the many good words uttered in honor of
Edwin Booth   At the Supper given on Saturday Night, March 30, 1889, by
Augustin Daly and A. M. Palmer. Printed for The Players. New York
1889. _4to, cloth, uncut edges._


BOOTH, MARY L.--History of the City of New York by Mary L. Booth . . .
Illustrated . . . New York   W. R. C. Clark . . . 1867. _Imperial 8vo,
two volumes, boards, uncut edges._

First edition. No. 49 of one hundred large paper copies printed.


BORROW, GEORGE.--Faustus: his Life, Death, and Descent into Hell.
Translated from the German. . . . London: W. Simpkin and R. Marshall.
1825. _Post 8vo, half russia, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition. Coloured frontispiece.


BORROW, GEORGE.--Romantic Ballads, translated from the Danish; and
Miscellaneous Pieces; by George Borrow. Norwich: printed and published
by S. Wilkin . . . 1826. _8vo, half red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition. Original autograph poems of Borrow and Allan Cunningham
inserted.


BORROW, GEORGE.--Targum. or Metrical Translations from thirty languages
and dialects. By George Borrow . . . St. Petersburg. Printed by Schulz
and Beneze. 1835. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


BORROW, GEORGE, _translator_.--The Talisman. From the Russian of
Alexander Pushkin. With other Pieces. St. Petersburg. Printed by Schulz
and Beneze. 1835. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._


BORROW, GEORGE, _translator_.--Embeo e Majaro Lucas. Broto-boro randado
andre la chipe griega, acana chibado andre o Romano, o chipe es zincales
de Sese. El Evangelio segun S. Lucas, traducido al Romani, o dialecto de
los Gitanos de Espana. 1837. _16mo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, by Riviere._

First edition.


BORROW, GEORGE.--The Zincali; or, an account of the Gypsies of Spain.
With an original collection of their songs and poetry, and a copious
dictionary of their language. By George Borrow, . . . London: John
Murray, . . . 1841. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


BORROW, GEORGE.--The Bible in Spain; or, the journeys, adventures, and
imprisonments of an Englishman, in an attempt to circulate the
scriptures in the Peninsula. By George Borrow, . . . London: John
Murray, . . . 1843. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, brown levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


BORROW, GEORGE.--Lavengro; the Scholar--the Gypsy--the Priest. By George
Borrow, . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1851. _Crown 8vo, three
volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First edition. Portrait by W. Holl after H. W. Phillips.


BORROW, GEORGE.--The Romany Rye; a sequel to "Lavengro." By George
Borrow, . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1857. . . . _Crown 8vo, two
volumes, maroon levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First edition.


BORROW, GEORGE, _translator_.--The Sleeping Bard; or Visions of the
World, Death, and Hell, by Elis Wyn. Translated from the Cambrian
British by George Borrow, . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1860. _8vo,
brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


BORROW, GEORGE.--Wild Wales: its people, language, and scenery. By
George Borrow, . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1862. . . . _Crown 8vo,
three volumes, light brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


BORROW, GEORGE.--Romano Lavo-Lil: Word-book of the Romany; or, English
Gypsy Language. With many pieces in gypsy, illustrative of the way of
speaking and thinking of the English gypsies; with specimens of their
poetry, and an account of certain gypsyries or places inhabited by them,
and of various things relating to gypsy life in England. By George
Borrow, . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1874. _Crown 8vo, green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


BOSWELL, JAMES.--The Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides, with Samuel
Johnson, L.L.D. By James Boswell, Esq. containing some Poetical Pieces
by D^{r} Johnson, relative to the Tour, and never before published; a
Series of his Conversation, Literary Anecdotes, and Opinions of Men and
Books: with an Authentick Account of the Distresses and Escape of the
Grandson of King James II, in the Year 1746   London: printed by Henry
Baldwin, for Charles Dilly . . . M.DCC.LXXXV. _8vo, original russia
binding, gilt back panels, edges entirely untrimmed._

Boswell's own copy, with manuscript corrections and additions in his
autograph.


BOSWELL, JAMES.--The Life of Samuel Johnson, LL.D. comprehending an
account of his studies and numerous works, in chronological order; a
series of his epistolary correspondence and conversations with many
eminent persons; and various original pieces of his composition, never
before published. The whole exhibiting a view of literature and literary
men in Great-Britain, for near half a century, during which he
flourished. . . . By James Boswell, Esq. . . . London: printed by Henry
Baldwin, for Charles Dilly, . . . M DCC XCI. _4to, two volumes, blue
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Portrait by J. Heath after Sir Joshua Reynolds, to whom
the work is dedicated. Inserted is an autograph letter from William
Forbes to Miss Boswell.


BOSWELL, JAMES.--The Life of Samuel Johnson, L.L.D.   By James Boswell,
Esq.   Oxford, Published by Talboys and Wheeler; and William Pickering,
London   M DCCC XXVI. _Royal 8vo, four volumes, blue levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

One of the fifty large paper copies. Portrait of Boswell by Worthington
after Reynolds, proof on India paper, and a facsimile.


BOSWELL, JAMES.--The Life of Samuel Johnson, 1826. _Royal 8vo, four
volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Another copy. One of fifty printed on large paper, illustrated by the
insertion of three hundred and fifty-eight engravings, comprising
thirty-two portraits of Johnson. One hundred and twenty-five are either
proofs on India paper or before letters. Two original drawings by
Harding, etc., and fifteen views and facsimiles are among the
illustrations.


BOSWELL, JAMES.--The Life of Samuel Johnson, LL.D. including a Journal
of his Tour to the Hebrides; by James Boswell, Esq.   To which are
added, Anecdotes by Hawkins, Piozzi, Murphy, Tyers, Reynolds, Steevens,
&c. and notes by various hands [also Johnsoniana]   London: John Murray
. . . M DCCC XXXV. _Foolscap 8vo, ten volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Forty-five portraits, views, and facsimile autographs engraved on steel.


BOTTA, ANNE CHARLOTTE LYNCH.--Memoirs of Anne C. L. Botta written by her
friends with selections from her correspondence and from her writings in
prose and poetry . . . [portrait]   New-York   J. Selwin Tait & Sons . . .
M DCCC XC IV. _12mo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


BOURNELLE.--Annotations on the Tatler. Written in French By Monsieur
Bournelle; and Translated into English By Walter Wagstaff, Esq;
Part I. . . . London: Printed for Bernard Lintott, . . . 1710. _12mo,
half blue calf, uncut edges._


BOURRIENNE, LOUIS ANTOINE FAUVELET DE.--Private Memoirs of Napoleon
Bonaparte, during the periods of the Directory, the Consulate, and the
Empire. By M. de Bourrienne, private secretary to the Emperor. . . .
London: Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, . . . 1830. _8vo, four
volumes, blue morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._


BOUTERWEK, FREDERICK.--History of Spanish and Portuguese Literature. By
Frederick Bouterwek . . . Translated from the Original German, by
Thomasina Ross. . . . London: Boosey and Sons . . . 1823. _8vo, two
volumes, half citron morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


BOWES, JAMES L.--A Vindication of the Decorated Pottery of Japan. by
James L. Bowes . . . [Liverpool]   Printed for private circulation. Not
for sale. MDCCCXCI. _8vo, original boards._

Three plates, two printed in colours.


BOWLKER, RICHARD.--The Art of Angling Improved, in all its parts,
Especially Fly-fishing: containing A particular Account of the
several Sorts of Fresh-Water Fish, with their most proper Baits.
Also The Names, Colours, and Seasons of all the most Useful Flies.
With Directions for making each Fly Artificially In the most Exact
manner, &c. The whole Interspers'd with many Curious and Uncommon
Observations. By Richard Bowlker. [Line from Martial] Worcester:
Printed by M. Olivers, in High-Street. [1746]. _12mo, old sprinkled
calf, gilt fillets._

First edition.

Collation: Title, A1 (verso blank). Dedication to Henry Arthur, Earl of
Powis, and Baron Herbert of Cherbury, A2. Text, B1-N4 (verso blank) in
fours. Pages 1-95.


BOWMAN AND IRWIN.--Sherman and his Campaigns: a military biography. By
Col. S. M. Bowman and Lt.-Col. R. B. Irwin. New York: Charles B.
Richardson. . . . 1865. _8vo, half brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Matthews._

Eight portraits and four maps.


BOWYER, WILLIAM.--See Nichols, John.


BOYER, ABEL.--Achilles: or, Iphigenia in Aulis. A Tragedy. as It is
Acted at the Theatre Royal in Drury-lane. Written by Mr. Boyer. [Two
lines from Horace] London. Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half-moon in
St. Pauls Church-yard. 1700. _4to, half green calf._

First edition. A-G in fours, title on A1.


BOYER, ABEL.--The Victim, or, Achilles and Iphigenia in Aulis: a
Tragedy. As it was Acted at the Theatre-Royal, in Drury-Lane. Written by
Mr. Boyer . . . The Second Edition. To which is added, An Advertisement
about the late Irregular Reviving of this Tragedy; with a Copy of Verses
to the Plagiary. London: Printed for James Knapton . . . MDCCXIV. _18mo,
brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Translated from Racine. See Johnson, Charles.


BRADLEY, JOHN W.--A Dictionary of Miniaturists, Illuminators,
Calligraphers, and Copyists, with references to their works, and notices
of their patrons, From the Establishment of Christianity to the
Eighteenth Century. Compiled from various sources, many hitherto
inedited. By John W. Bradley, . . . London: Bernard Quaritch, . . .
1887.-'8-'9. _8vo, three volumes, half red morocco, uncut edges._


BRADLEY, JOHN W.--The Life and Works of Giorgio Giulio Clovio,
Miniaturist, with notices of his contemporaries, and of the art of book
decoration in the sixteenth century. By John W. Bradley, . . . with
eighteen plates. London: Bernard Quaritch, . . . 1891. _Royal 8vo, half
red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


BRADSTREET, ANNE.--The Poems of Mrs. Anne Bradstreet (1612-1672)
together with her prose remains with an introduction by Charles Eliot
Norton   The Duodecimos   [New York, the De Vinne Press] M DCCC XCVII.
_12mo, boards, uncut edges._

Etched frontispiece-portrait and eleven other illustrations. Edited by
Frank E. Hopkins. No. 46 of one hundred and thirty-two copies printed on
hand-made paper.


BRAMSTON, JAMES.--The Art of Politicks, In Imitation of Horace's Art of
Poetry. [vignette of Horace] London: Printed for Lawton Gilliver, . . .
M DCC XXIX. _8vo, brown straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges,
by The Club Bindery._

Grotesque frontispiece with the legend "--Risum teneatis amici?"
illustrating the opening lines of the poem,

/p
    "If to a Human Face Sir James [Thornhill] should draw
    A Gelding's Mane, and Feathers of Maccaw,
    A Lady's Bosom, and a Tail of Cod,
    Who could help laughing at a Sight so odd?
    Just such a Monster, Sirs, pray think before ye,
    When you behold one Man both Whig and Tory,"
p/

A-F in fours, title on A1.

Bound with this work are Swift's "Epistle to a Lady," B1-B4 recto; "On
Reading Dr. Young's Satire," B4 verso-C1 recto; "On Poetry," C1 verso-D3
recto. "On the Words, Brother-Protestants, and Fellow-Christians,"
D3 verso-D4 (verso blank), without title-page.


BRAMSTON, JAMES.--The Man of Taste. Occasion'd by an Epistle Of Mr.
Pope's On that Subject. By the Author of the Art of Politicks. London:
Printed by J. Wright, for Lawton Gilliver . . . 1733. . . . _Folio, red
morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery. Bound with "Beauty: or, the
Art of Charming," 1735._

First edition, with engraving by G. Van der Gucht on the verso of the
half-title.


BRAY, ANNA ELIZA.--Life of Thomas Stothard, R.A., with Personal
Reminiscences. By Mrs. Bray. With numerous illustrations from his works.
London: John Murray . . . 1851. _4to, green morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges._


BRAY, ANNA ELIZA.--Life of Thomas Stothard, 1851. _4to, boards, uncut
edges._

Another copy.


BRAY, ANNA ELIZA.--Life of Thomas Stothard, 1851. _4to, enlarged to
seven volumes, folio, red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt
edges, by Matthews._

Another copy, enlarged by inlaying the text on Whatman's drawing paper
to folio (14 x 10-1/2 inches), and further illustrated by the insertion
of seven hundred and thirty-five plates, etc., and an autograph letter
of Stothard. The illustrations include forty-one original drawings and
studies, forty portraits, six hundred and fifty engravings after
Stothard's designs and his original etchings. Nearly all the plates are
proofs, some in three or four states from the trial proof to the
finished plate, and in addition many prints retouched by Stothard with
his autograph instructions on the margin.


BREVAL, JOHN DURANT, CAPT.--The Petticoat: an Heroi-Comical Poem. In Two
Books. By Mr. [Joseph] Gay . . . London: Printed for R. Burleigh in Amen
Corner, MDCCXVI. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt edges._

First edition, written over Breval's pseudonym.


BREVAL, JOHN DURANT, CAPTAIN.--The Progress of a Rake: or, the Templar's
Exit. In ten cantos, in Hudibrastick Verse. containing. I. His coming
out of the West of England, being put under the Care of his Uncle, a
Middlesex Justice. II. His Learning at Westminster-School; and
his creeping to Bed with the Maid, for fear of the Spirits. III. His
going to Brasen-Nose College at Oxford; being expell'd for his
Debaucheries; and Return into the Country; with his Whoring, Roaring,
Ranting, Swearing, Fighting, &c. IV. His coming again to London; falling
among Pettifoggers, and Solicitors; and the Disputes among his
Friends, whether he should be a Priest, a Lawyer, or a Physician.
V. His following all three successively; and his vast Improvement
in each Faculty, especially that of a Cushion-thumper. VI. His
Natural Philosophy; other natural Parts, and natural Impudence. VII.
His Conversation with old Bauds, young Whores, and Town Sharpers.
VIII. His ruining his Reputation, Estate, and Constitution. IX. His
Pains, and Repentance; Sickness without Pity; and Misery without
Mercy. X. His Death by a Halter; Burial by a Dung-hil; and
Funeral-Sermon by a converted Rake of Covent-Garden. The whole
interspers'd with innocent Mirth, good Morals, and too much of the
Author's own Experience. By the Author of The Harlot's Progress.
["Joseph Gay," _i.e._, Captain John Durant Breval]   London: Printed
for B. Dickinson. . . . and R. Montague . . . : And Sold by E. Nutt,
and J. Brotherton . . . ; A. Dodd . . . ; J. Brindly . . . ; J. Jolliff
. . . ; Mr. Critchly . . . ; and J. Stagg. . . . 1732   [Price One
Shilling.] _8vo, green morocco, gilt edges. Bound with "Spiller's Jests"
and three other works._

George Daniel's copy, with the following note on the fly-leaf: "'The
Progress of a Rake' I believe to be very rare."


BREVAL, JOHN DURANT, CAPTAIN.--The Harlot's Progress: or, the Humours of
Drury-Lane. Being the Life of the noted Moll Hackabout, in six
Hudibrastick Cantos, with a curious Print to each Canto, engrav'd from
the Originals of Mr. Hogarth. I. Her coming to Town in the York Waggon;
and being betray'd by an old Baud into the Arms of Colonel Ch[arteri]s;
with several Comical Dialogues, &c. II. Her being kept by a Jew; with
her Intrigues in his House. III. Her living in a Baudy-House in
Drury-Lane. A diverting List of the Decorations of her Lodging. Her
being detected by Sir J----n G----n, &c. IV. Her Usage at
Tothil-Fields Bridewell; and the Humours of the Place. V. Her Sickness
and Death. Disputes between two noted Quacks. Her last Will. VI. Her
Burial. Characters of the principal Persons who constituted the
Funeral Pomp, &c. The Fifth Edition. To which is now first added, a
curious Riddle, which Moll learned of the Jew, while in his keeping, and
which the learned Col. Ch----s could never answer to her full
Satisfaction. N.B. Those who have had of the former Impressions, may
have the Riddle singly, at the Price of Six Pence. London: Printed for
R. Montagu . . . ; and sold by Mrs. Nut . . . ; Mrs. Dod . . . ; Mr.
Brindley . . . ; Mr. Jollife . . . ; and Mr. Stag . . . [n. d.] Price
Two Shillings. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt edges. Bound with
"Spiller's Jests" and three other works._

Copper-plate frontispiece, and six aquatints after Hogarth.

George Daniel's copy.

The first edition was an octavo, published in 1732.


BREWER, J. S.--The Reign of Henry VIII from his accession to the death
of Wolsey. Reviewed and illustrated from original documents by the late
J. S. Brewer, . . . Edited by James Gairdner . . . With portrait.
London: John Murray, . . . 1884. _8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._


BRIDGES, ROBERT.--Prometheus the Firegiver by Robert Bridges   Printed
at the private press of H. Daniel Ffllow of Worcester College   Oxford
1883. _4to, half vellum, uncut edges._

First edition. No. 98 of one hundred copies printed.


BRIDGES, ROBERT.--Prometheus the Firegiver. By Robert Bridges. London
George Bell and Sons . . . 1884. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


BRIDGES, ROBERT.--Eros & Psyche   a poem in twelve measures by Robert
Bridges   the story done into English from the Latin of Apuleius . . .
London: George Bell and Sons   1885. _Square crown 8vo, half vellum,
uncut edges._


BRIDGES, ROBERT.--The Feast of Bacchvs by Robert Bridges. Privately
printed by H. Daniel: Oxford: 1889. _4to, half parchment, uncut edges._

No. 19 of one hundred and five copies printed.


BRIDGES, ROBERT.--The Growth of Love. Printed by H. Daniel: Oxford:
1890. _4to, boards, uncut edges._

No. 62 of one hundred copies printed.


BRIDGES, ROBERT.--Eden   an oratorio by Robert Bridges set to music by
C. V. Stanford. London   Geo Bell & Sons . . . 1891. _12mo, boards,
uncut edges._

No. 86 of one hundred and ten copies printed on hand-made paper.


BRIDGES, ROBERT.--Eden. 1891. _12mo, boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

Another copy. No. 101 of one hundred and ten copies printed.


BRIDGES, ROBERT.--Achilles in Scyros by Robert Bridges. London: Geo.
Bell & Sons 1892. _12mo, parchment, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred and fifty-six printed.


BRIDGES, ROBERT.--The Humours of the Court   A Comedy and other poems.
New York   Macmillan and Co . . . 1893. _8vo, buckram, uncut edges._

One hundred copies printed on hand-made paper.


BRITISH CLASSICS.--[Half title] The British Classics . . . 1803 [-1810]
[Imprint on engraved titles] London. Printed by C. Whittingham, . . .
Published by John Sharpe, . . . [W. Suttaby] 1804 [-1803-1810]. _12mo,
twenty-four volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Allo._

Large paper copy.

The Tatler, four volumes, 1804, contains twenty plates, including the
frontispieces, by Neagle, Schiavonetti, Fittler, Anker Smith, and others
after Stothard, Fuseli, Tresham, Westall, Singleton, etc.

The Spectator, eight volumes, 1803, contains forty plates by the same
artists and others.

The Guardian, two volumes, 1804, contains ten plates after R. Smirke.

The Adventurer, four volumes, with half-titles dated 1807 and engraved
titles 1806, 1806, 1807, and 1805, contains four portraits by
Schiavonetti after Reynolds and Highmore and twelve plates after
Westall.

The Rambler, four volumes, 1809, "Published by W. Suttaby," contains a
portrait of Dr. Johnson by Schiavonetti after Reynolds and fifteen
plates after R. Smirke.

The Idler, two volumes, 1810, "Published by W. Suttaby," contains a
portrait of Sir Joshua Reynolds by Schiavonetti after Reynolds and seven
plates after Richard Cook.


BRITISH DRAMA.--The British Drama; comprehending the best Plays in the
English language. [Edited by Sir Walter Scott] London: published by
William Miller . . . printed by James Ballantyne, Edinburgh. 1804.
_Royal 8vo, five volumes, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Comprising Comedies, two volumes, Tragedies, two volumes, and Operas and
Farces, one volume.


BRITISH DRAMA.--The Ancient British Drama. London: printed for William
Miller . . . by James Ballantyne and C^{o}   Edinburgh 1810. _Royal 8vo,
three volumes, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Sir Walter Scott is believed to have edited these volumes. The matter is
chiefly taken from Dodsley's Old Plays.


BRITISH ESSAYISTS.--The British Essayists; with Prefaces, historical and
biographical, by A. Chalmers. [with a general Index] London: printed for
Nichols and Son &c 1817. _12mo, forty-five volumes, calf, gilt back and
sides._

Portraits of Steele, Addison, Pope, Johnson, Swift, Horace Walpole,
Joseph and Thomas Warton, Bonnell Thornton, Chesterfield, Mackenzie,
Colman, Hawksworth, Edward Moore, Hughes, and Bishop Berkeley.


BRITISH ESSAYISTS.--The British Essayists: with prefaces, historical and
biographical. By A. Chalmers, . . . Boston: Little, Brown, and Company.
1866. _12mo, thirty-eight volumes, half green morocco, uncut edges._

No. 52 of one hundred copies printed on large paper, with fourteen
portraits on India paper.

The contents are as follows: Vols. I-IV, Tatler; V-XII, Spectator;
XIII-XV, Guardian; XVI-XVIII, Rambler; XIX-XXI, Adventurer; XXII-XXIV,
World; XXV-XXVI, Connoisseur; XXVII, Idler; XXVIII-XXIX, Mirror;
XXX-XXXI, Lounger; XXXII-XXXIV, Observer; XXXV-XXXVII, Looker-on;
XXXVIII, Index.


BRITISH POETS.--_4to, red levant morocco, gilt back, side panel, gilt
edges._

Twelve drawings by J. Thurston in India ink, sepia, and pencil, being
portraits of John Gower, Chaucer, Shakespeare, Jonson, Massinger,
Shirley, John Fletcher, Milton, D'Urfey, Young, Gray, and George Colman.


BRITISH THEATRE.--[A Collection of one hundred and eighty Plays &c from
the series edited by Bell and Cawthorn, with the addition of six Dramas
written by James Wild. London   1791-'2-'3-'4-'5-'6-'7 and 1804-'6.
_Crown 8vo, forty-one volumes, red morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt
edges._

Large paper copy.

Includes Cawthorn's Minor British Theatre complete in six volumes; the
whole illustrated with one hundred and seventy-six portraits and scenes,
proofs lettered and before letters.


BRITISH THEATRE.--Bell's British Theatre. Consisting of the most
esteemed English Plays. . . . London: printed for, and under the
direction of, George Cawthorn, . . . 1797. _8vo, thirty-four volumes,
green morocco, gilt back, crest on the sides, gilt edges, by J. Clarke._

Large paper copy, with proof impressions of the plates, including
portraits of famous actors and actresses.


BRITISH THEATRE.--Bell's British Theatre, 1797. _8vo, Volumes I-XXII,
red levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Triquilier._

Another copy, also upon large paper, and uncut.


BRITTON, JOHN.--Picturesque Antiquities of the English Cities
illustrated by a series of engravings of Antient Buildings, Street
Scenery, etc. with historical and descriptive accounts of each subject.
By John Britton . . . London: Longman . . . 1830. _Royal 4to, blue
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Large paper copy, with India proof impressions of the sixty plates after
Bartlett, and numerous woodcuts.


BRODRICK, THOMAS.--Historia Sacra: or the Holy History; giving An Exact
and Comprehensive Account Of all the Feasts and Fasts of the Church of
England, after a New and Curious Method; With their various Etymologies
and Appellations, And the true Reasons and Grounds of their Celebration;
. . . London: Printed for John Wyat, . . . 1705. _8vo, old blue morocco,
gilt back, sides richly tooled in compartments introducing the rose,
thistle, and tulip, gilt edges._

Portrait of the author by W. Sherwin and fifty plates, including, in the
Appendix, the illustrations to the Gunpowder Plot, the Execution of
Charles I, and the Restoration of Charles II.


BRONTE, CHARLOTTE.--Poems by Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell. London:
Smith, Elder and C^{o} . . . 1846. _Post 8vo, half green levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

First edition.


BRONTE, CHARLOTTE.--Jane Eyre. An Autobiography. Edited by Currer Bell.
London: Smith, Elder, and Co., . . . 1847. _Crown 8vo, three volumes,
half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

First edition.


BRONTE, CHARLOTTE.--Shirley. A Tale. By Currer Bell. London: Smith,
Elder and Co., . . . 1849. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, half green levant
morocco, gilt and mosaic back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

First edition.


BRONTE, CHARLOTTE.--Villette. By Currer Bell. London: Smith, Elder &
Co., . . . 1853. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, half blue levant morocco,
gilt and mosaic back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

First edition.


BRONTE, CHARLOTTE.--The Professor, A Tale. By Currer Bell. . . . London:
Smith, Elder & Co . . . 1857. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, half green
levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

First edition.


BROOKE, HENRY.--See Moore, Edward.

BROOKES, RICHARD.--The Art of Angling, Rock and Sea-Fishing: With the
Natural History of River, Pond and Sea-Fish. Illustrated with 133 Cutts.
London: Printed by and for John Watts . . . MDCCXL. _12mo, calf, gilt
back and edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


BROOKES, RICHARD.--The Art of Angling. By R. Brookes, M.D. Now Improved
with Additions, And formed into a Dictionary. . . . Illustrated with One
Hundred and Thirty-five Cuts, exactly describing the different kinds of
Fish that are found in the Fresh or Salt Waters. The Whole forming A
Sportsman's Magazine; And comprising all that is curious and valuable in
The Art of Angling. . . . London, Printed for T. Lowndes . . . MDCCLXVI.
_12mo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Cuzin._

The additional cuts in this edition are the frontispiece and the
vignette at the head of the first page.


BROUGHAM AND VAUX, HENRY PETER, LORD.--Historical Sketches of Statesmen
who flourished in the time of George III. to which is added, Remarks on
Party, and an Appendix. . . . By Henry Lord Brougham, . . . London:
Charles Knight & Co., . . . MDCCCXXXIX. [-MDCCCXLIII.]. _Royal 8vo,
three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

The First Series is second edition, and the Third is dated 1843.
Thirty-four portraits.


BROUGHAM AND VAUX, HENRY PETER, LORD.--Albert Lunel; or, the Chateau of
Languedoc. . . . London: Charles Knight & Co., . . . 1844. _Post 8vo,
three volumes, red morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Matthews._

Dedicated to Samuel Rogers. Suppressed on the eve of publication.


BROUGHAM, AND VAUX, HENRY PETER, LORD.--Lives of Men of Letters and
Science, who flourished in the time of George III. By Henry, Lord
Brougham, F.R.S., . . . With [14] portraits, engraved on steel. London:
Charles Knight and Co., . . . 1845. [-46.] _Royal 8vo, two volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._


BROWN, JOHN.--Horae Subsecivae. By John Brown, M.D. . . . A second series.
Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas. 1861. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


BROWN, JOHN J.--The American Angler's Guide; or, Complete Fisher's
Manual, for the United States: containing the opinions and practices of
experienced Anglers of both hemispheres; with the various modes adopted
in Ocean, River, Lake and Pond Fishing . . . Fourth Edition, revised,
corrected, and greatly improved, with the Addition of a Second Part . . .
New York: H. Long & Brother . . . and John J. Brown & C^{o} . . . 1850.
_8vo, orange morocco, gilt back with emblematic tool in the panels, gilt
edges, by Matthews._

Every page illustrated with engravings either on steel, stone, or wood.


BROWN, JOHN WILLIAM.--The Life of Leonardo da Vinci, with a critical
account of his works, by John William Brown, Esq. . . . London: William
Pickering. M DCCC XXVIII. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, side
corners, centre ornaments, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Besides the portrait of da Vinci and the Lord's Supper engraved by W. H.
Worthington, on India paper, thirty-five other illustrations, including
eleven portraits of da Vinci, have been inserted in this volume, some in
three states.


BROWN, THOMAS.--A Description of Mr. D[ryde]n's Funeral. A Poem. The
Third Edition, with Additions. London, Printed for A. Baldwin in
Warwicklane, M.DCC. Price 6d. _Folio, cloth, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._


BROWN, THOMAS.--The Works of Mr. Thomas Brown, Serious and Comical, In
Prose and Verse . . . The Fourth Edition, Corrected, and much Enlarged
from his Originals never before publish'd. With A Key to all his
Writings. London, Printed for Sam. Briscoe, . . . 1715. _12mo, four
volumes in two, old red morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges._

Frontispieces.


BROWN, THOMAS.--The Works of Mr. Thomas Brown, serious and comical, In
prose and verse: with his Remains. In Four Volumes Compleat. With The
Life and Character of Mr. Brown, and his Writings, By James Drake, M. D.
And a Key to the Whole. The Ninth Edition, carefully corrected. Adorned
with a new Set of Copper-Plates. London: Printed for Al. Wilde, C. Hitch
and L. Hawes, . . . M.DCC.LX. _12mo, four volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Twenty-seven plates by E. Kirkall and R. Smith.


BROWNE, IRVING.--Doctor Polyanthus, or, Where there's a Will there's a
Way; a farce in two acts. By Irving Browne. Privately printed. [Troy,
n.d.]. _8vo, original paper wrappers._

Presentation copy from the author.


BROWNE, IRVING.--Ballads of A Book-worm Being a Rythmic Record of
Thoughts, Fancies, & Adventures a-collecting   By Irving Browne   Done
into a printed book by the Roycrofters, . . . East Aurora, . . . M DCCC
XCIX. _12mo, boards, uncut edges._

No. 471 of eight hundred and fifty copies "illumined by hand."


BROWNE, MATTHEW.--Chaucer's England. By Matthew Browne. . . . London:
Hurst and Blackett, . . . 1869. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, original cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition, with a steel portrait of Chaucer and numerous woodcut
illustrations.


BROWNING, ELIZABETH BARRETT.--An Essay on Mind, with other Poems.
London: James Duncan . . . MDCCCXXVI. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


BROWNING, ELIZABETH BARRETT.--The Seraphim, and other Poems. By
Elizabeth B. Barrett. London: Saunders and Otley . . . 1838. _Small 8vo,
green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


BROWNING, ELIZABETH BARRETT.--Poems. By Elizabeth Barrett Barrett . . .
London: Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXLIV. _Small 8vo, two volumes, green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


BROWNING, ELIZABETH BARRETT.--The Earlier Poems of Elizabeth Barrett
Browning. 1826-1833. London   Bartholomew Robson: . . . M.DCCC.LXXVIII.
_Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


BROWNING, ELIZABETH BARRETT.--Elizabeth Barrett Browning's Poetical
Works . . . New-York: Dodd, Mead and Company   MDCCCLXXXIV. _12mo, five
volumes, citron levant morocco, back and side panels inlaid with blue
morocco and ornamented with scroll and floral tooling, gilt tops, uncut
edges, by David._

No. 6 of twenty copies printed on Japan paper. Portrait by S. Hollyer.


BROWNING, ELIZABETH BARRETT.--Elizabeth Barrett Browning's Poetical
Works. 1884. _12mo, five volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back and
side panels, with corner ornament, gilt edges, by David._

Another copy. No. 1 of four printed on vellum.


BROWNING, ROBERT.--Sordello. By Robert Browning. London: Edward Moxon,
. . . M DCCC XL. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


BROWNING, ROBERT.--(I.) Bells and Pomegranates. N^{o}. I.--Pippa Passes.
By Robert Browning, author of "Paracelsus." London: Edward Moxon,
[Bradbury and Evans, Printers] . . . M DCCC XLI. (II.) Bells and
Pomegranates. N^{o}. II.--King Victor and King Charles. By Robert
Browning, . . . London: Edward Moxon, . . . M DCCC XLII. (III.) Bells
and Pomegranates. N^{o}. III.--Dramatic Lyrics. By Robert Browning, . . .
London: Edward Moxon, . . . M DCCC XLII. (IV.) Bells and Pomegranates.
N^{o}. IV.--The Return of the Druses. A Tragedy. In five acts. By Robert
Browning. . . . London: Edward Moxon, . . . M DCCC XLIII. (V.) Bells and
Pomegranates. N^{o}. V.--A Blot in the 'Scutcheon. A Tragedy, in three
acts. By Robert Browning, . . . London: Edward Moxon, . . . M DCCC
XLIII. (VI.) Bells and Pomegranates. N^{o}. VI.--Colombe's Birthday. A
Play, in five acts. By Robert Browning, . . . [Three lines from Hanmer]
London: Edward Moxon, . . . M DCCC XLIV. (VII.) Bells and Pomegranates.
No. VII. Dramatic Romances & Lyrics. By Robert Browning, . . . London:
Edward Moxon, . . . M DCCC XLV. (VIII.) Bells and Pomegranates. No.
VIII. and last. Luria; and A Soul's Tragedy. By Robert Browning, . . .
London: Edward Moxon, . . . M DCCC XLVI. _Royal 8vo, red levant morocco,
gilt back, wide side borders in conventional floral design, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.

"A Blot in the 'Scutcheon" was first acted at the Theatre Royal, Drury
Lane, February 11, 1843, with Helen Faucit as Mildred Tresham.
"Colombe's Birthday" is dedicated to Barry Cornwall, March, 1844,
"Dramatic Romances and Lyrics" to John Kenyon, November, 1845, and
"Luria" to Walter Savage Landor, March 29, 1846.

There are two final leaves of advertisements.


BROWNING, ROBERT.--Men and Women. By Robert Browning. . . . London:
Chapman and Hall, . . . 1855. _Post 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


BROWNING, ROBERT.--Selections from the Poetry of Robert Browning. With
an Introduction by Richard Grant White. New York: Dodd, Mead & Company
. . . . [1883]. _8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back, and corner
ornaments on the sides, gilt edges, by Cuzin._

The portrait of Browning is in two states, before and after the letters.

No. 34 of seventy copies printed on large, Japanese paper.


BROWNING, ROBERT.--Asolando: fancies and facts. By Robert Browning.
London: Smith, Elder, & Co., . . . 1890. _Post 8vo, red levant morocco,
back and sides beautifully tooled, rose-vine decoration, gilt edges, by
Lloyd._

First edition.


BRYAN, MICHAEL.--A biographical and critical Dictionary of Painters and
Engravers, from the revival of the art under Cimabue, and the alledged
discovery of engraving by Finiguerra, to the present time: with the
ciphers, monograms, and marks, used by each engraver; and an ample list
of their principal works. Together with two indexes, alphabetical and
chronological. To which is prefixed, an introduction, containing A Brief
Account of the Painters of Antiquity. By Michael Bryan. . . . [5 plates]
London: printed for Carpenter and Son, . . . 1816. _Imperial 4to, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Large and thick paper copy.


BRYAN AND STANLEY.--A biographical and critical Dictionary of Painters
and Engravers, from the revival of the art under Cimabue, and the
alleged discovery of engraving by Finiguerra, to the present time: with
the ciphers, monograms, and marks, used by each engraver: by Michael
Bryan. A new edition, revised, enlarged, and continued to the present
time, comprising above one thousand additional memoirs, and large
accessions to the lists of pictures and engravings, also new plates of
ciphers and monograms, by George Stanley. London: H. G. Bohn, . . . M
DCCC LVIII. _Royal 8vo, cloth._

Portrait of Bryan by W. Haines after A. Pope, and nine plates of
monograms.


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--The Embargo, or sketches of the times; a
satire. By a youth of thirteen. Boston: printed for the purchasers.
1808. _12mo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, by Alfred
Matthews._

First edition.


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--The Embargo; or, sketches of the times. A
satire. The second edition, corrected and enlarged. Together with the
Spanish Revolution, and other poems. By William Cullen Bryant. Boston:
printed for the author, by E. G. House, . . . 1809. _16mo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, by Alfred Matthews._

Presentation copy with inscription "L. Hyde's From the Author 1811."


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--Poems by William Cullen Bryant. Cambridge:
printed by Hilliard and Metcalf. 1821. _12mo, red levant morocco, gilt
back, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition, concluding with "Thanatopsis."


BRYANT, LONGFELLOW, AND OTHERS.--Miscellaneous Poems selected from the
United States Literary Gazette. Boston: Cummings, Hilliard and Company,
and Harrison Gray. 1826. _18mo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, side
border, gilt top, uncut edges, by Alfred Matthews._

Contains twenty-three poems by Bryant and fourteen by Longfellow.


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN, AND OTHERS.--Tales of the Glauber-Spa. By
several American authors. [Bryant, Miss Sedgwick, Paulding, Sands, and
Leggett.] . . . New York: printed and published by J. & J. Harper, . . .
M DCCC XXXII. _12mo, two volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, with the original covers bound in, by Riviere._

First edition.


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--Poems by William Cullen Bryant [including many
now first collected]   New York: published by E. Bliss, . . .
M.DCCC.XXXII. _12mo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by David._

Part of this edition was issued with a Boston imprint.


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--Poems by William Cullen Bryant, an American.
Edited by Washington Irving. London: J. Andrews . . . MDCCCXXXII. _Crown
8vo, green morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Matthews._

Four portraits of Bryant and one of Irving inserted.

This edition is famous for a change made by Irving in the "Song of
Marion's Men," as follows,--

/p
    "The foeman trembles in his camp,"
p/

instead of as in the original.


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--Poems by William Cullen Bryant. Third edition.
[Newly revised, with additions]   New York: Harper & brothers, . . .
1836. _12mo, citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by
David._

Engraved title-frontispiece by Cushman after Weir.

The copies dated "third edition, 1836," were copyrighted in the same
year; those dated "fourth edition" were copyrighted in 1835.


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--Poems by William Cullen Bryant. Collected and
arranged by the author. Illustrated with seventy-one engravings, from
drawings by eminent artists. New York: D. Appleton & Co. . . . [n. d.].
_4to, half green levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Portrait by Thomas Dalziel after Lawrence, and seventy other woodcuts by
the Brothers Dalziel after Birket Foster, J. Tenniel, Edward and Thomas
Dalziel, Harrison Weir, and others.


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--The Fountain and other poems. By William Cullen
Bryant. New York & London: Wiley and Putnam.   1842. _12mo, citron
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over rough edges, by David._

First edition.


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--Poems by William Cullen Bryant. With
illustrations by E. Leutze, engraved by American artists. Fourth
Edition. Philadelphia: Carey and Hart. 1848. _8vo, brown morocco, gilt
back and sides, gilt edges._

Portrait by J. Cheney from a drawing by S. W. Cheney, and nineteen other
plates.


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--Poems by William Cullen Bryant. Collected and
arranged by the author. New York: D. Appleton and Company . . .
M.DCCC.LV. _12mo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--Thirty Poems   William Cullen Bryant   New
York: D. Appleton and Company . . . MDCCCLXIV. _12mo, cloth, uncut
edges._

Autograph of "William Cullen Bryant. March 1864" on the fly-leaf.


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--Thirty Poems. 1864. _12mo, citron levant
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Another copy.


BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.--The Song of the Sower. By William Cullen
Bryant. Illustrated with forty-two engravings on wood. New York: D.
Appleton & Company   MDCCCLXXI. _4to, green morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by Matthews._

First edition.


BRYANT AND GAY.--A popular History of the United States, from the first
discovery of the Western Hemisphere by the Northmen, to the end of the
first century of the union of the states. Preceded by a sketch of the
pre-historic period and the age of the mound builders. By William Cullen
Bryant and Sydney Howard Gay. . . . Fully illustrated. New York:
Scribner, Armstrong, and Company. 1876. [1878, 1879, 1881.] _Royal 8vo,
four volumes, half red straight-grain morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Stikeman._

First edition. Portrait of Bryant by Charles Burt, sixteen other steel
plates, and numerous full-page woodcuts and illustrations in the text.


BRYDGES AND HASLEWOOD.--The British Bibliographer. By Sir Egerton
Brydges . . . and Joseph Haslewood. London: printed for R. Triphook . . .
by T. Bensley . . . 1810-'12-'14. _8vo, four volumes, half brown
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Two hundred and fifty copies printed. Six portraits inserted.


BRYDGES, SIR SAMUEL EGERTON.--Bertram, a poetical tale. By Sir Egerton
Brydges . . . Kent: Printed at the private Press of Lee Priory . . .
1814. _Royal 8vo, mottled calf, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by
Bedford._

One hundred copies printed, with woodcuts.


BRYDGES, SIR SAMUEL EGERTON.--Restituta; or Titles, Extracts, and
Characters of Old Books in English Literature revived. By Sir Egerton
Brydges . . . London: printed by T. Bensley . . . for Longman . . .
1814-'15-'16. _8vo, four volumes, half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Two hundred and fifty copies printed.


BRYDGES, SIR SAMUEL EGERTON.--Censura Literaria. Containing Titles,
Abstracts, and Opinions of Old English Books, with original
disquisitions, articles of biography, and other literary antiquities. By
Sir Egerton Brydges, . . . Second Edition. With the articles classed in
chronological order under their separate heads. London: printed for
Longman, . . . 1815. _8vo, ten volumes (in five), half green levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Smith-Mansell._

Two hundred and fifty copies printed.


BRYDGES, SIR SAMUEL EGERTON.--Sir Ralph Willoughby: an historical tale
of the sixteenth century. In which are inserted the dedicatory Sonnets
of Edmund Spenser, with sketches of character, by the author of
Coningsby. Florence   Printed by I. Magheri   1820. _12mo, red morocco,
gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by Mackenzie._

Large paper copy.


BRYDGES, SIR SAMUEL EGERTON.--An Impartial Portrait of Lord Byron, as a
poet and a man, compared with all the evidences and writings regarding
him, up to 1825. By Sir Egerton Brydges, . . . Paris: published by A.
and W. Galignani, . . . 1825. _12mo, half red morocco, gilt back._


BRYDGES, SIR SAMUEL EGERTON.--The Autobiography, Times, Opinions, and
Contemporaries of Sir Egerton Brydges, . . . [vignette] . . . London:
Cochrane and M'Crone. MDCCCXXXIV. _8vo, two volumes, half red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


BUCHANAN, ROBERT.--The Fleshly School of Poetry and other phenomena of
the day   By Robert Buchanan . . . Strahan & Co. . . . London   1872.
_Crown 8vo, original paper covers._


BUCHANAN, ROBERT.--The City of Dream an Epic Poem by Robert Buchanan . . .
London   Chatto & Windus . . . 1888. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Frontispiece and vignette.


BUCKINGHAM AND CHANDOS, RICHARD GRENVILLE, (SECOND) DUKE OF.--Memoirs of
the Court and Cabinets of George the Third. From original family
documents. By the Duke of Buckingham and Chandos . . . London: Hurst and
Blackett . . . 1853.-5. _8vo, four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portraits of George, Marquis of Buckingham, Lord Grenville, the Hon.
Thomas Grenville, and C. J. Fox.


BUCKLAND, WILLIAM.--Geology and Mineralogy considered with reference to
Natural Theology by the Rev. William Buckland, D.D. . . . London
William Pickering   1836. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Bridgewater Treatise, No. VI.


BUCKLE, HENRY THOMAS, _editor_.--[Half-title] Library illustrative of
Social Progress. From the original editions collected by the late Henry
Thomas Buckle, . . . No. 1. [and 2] "Exhibition of Female Flagellants."
[No. 3. "Lady Bumtickler's Revels." No. 4. "The Use of Flogging in
Venereal Affairs." No. 5. "Madame Birchini's Dance." No. 6. "Sublime of
Flagellation." No. 7. "Fashionable Lectures"]   [London, n. d.]. _Crown
8vo, seven volumes, boards, uncut edges._


BUCKLEY, THEODORE ALOIS.--The Natural History of Tuft-hunters [vignette]
and toadies. Illustrated by H. G. Hine. [50 woodcuts]   London: D.
Bogue, . . . M DCCC XLVIII. _16mo, half green levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original front cover bound in._


BUDGET OF MOMUS.--The Budget of Momus or a preservative against
Melancholy, [vignette] London. Printed for J. Coxhead, . . . [n. d.].
_12mo, mottled calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


BULLEN, GEORGE, _editor_.--Caxton Celebration, 1877. Catalogue of the
Loan Collection of Antiquities, Curiosities, and Appliances connected
with the Art of Printing South Kensington. Edited by George Bullen, . . .
London: printed at the Elzevir Press. _Royal 4to, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 9 of twelve copies printed on hand-made paper.


BULWER-LYTTON, SIR EDWARD.--Eugene Aram. A tale. By the author of
"Pelham," . . . London: Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, . . . 1832.
_Post 8vo, three volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

First edition.


BULWER-LYTTON, SIR EDWARD.--Ernest Maltravers by the author of "Pelham,"
. . . London Saunders and Otley, . . . 1837. _Post 8vo, three volumes,
original boards, uncut edges._

First edition.


BULWER-LYTTON, SIR EDWARD.--Alice or The Mysteries a sequel to "Ernest
Maltravers." By the author of "Pelham," . . . London Saunders and Otley,
. . . 1838. _Post 8vo, three volumes, original half cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


BULWER-LYTTON, SIR EDWARD.--Zanoni. By the author of "Night and
Morning," . . . London: Saunders & Otley, . . . 1842. _Post 8vo, three
volumes, original half cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


BULWER-LYTTON, SIR EDWARD.--The Last of the Barons by the author of
"Rienzi." . . . London   Saunders and Otley, . . . 1843. _Post 8vo,
three volumes, original half cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


BULWER-LYTTON, SIR EDWARD.--Harold, the last of the Saxon Kings; by the
author of "Rienzi;" &c . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1848. _Post
8vo, three volumes, original half cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


BULWER-LYTTON, SIR EDWARD.--The Caxtons   a family picture by Sir E.
Bulwer Lytton, Bart. . . . William Blackwood and Sons Edinburgh and
London M DCCC XLIX. _Post 8vo, three volumes, original cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


BULWER-LYTTON, SIR EDWARD.--The Poetical and Dramatic Works of Sir
Edward Bulwer Lytton . . . London: Chapman and Hall . . . 1852-3-4.
_Post 8vo, five volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First collected edition, with portrait and engraved titles on steel.


BULWER-LYTTON, SIR EDWARD.--See Schiller, Friedrich.


[BUNBURY, H.]--Annals of Horsemanship: containing accounts of accidental
experiments, and experimental accidents, both successful and
unsuccessful: communicated by various correspondents to Geoffrey
Gambado, . . . together with most instructive remarks thereon, and
answers thereto, by that accomplished genius. And now first published by
the Editor of the Academy for Grown Horsemen. Illustrated with cuts by
the most eminent artists. London: printed for W. Dickinson, &c . . .
MDCCXCI. _4to, brown levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with seventeen plates after Bunbury's designs. Ascribed
also to Francis Grose, with caricatures by Bunbury.


BURGON, JOHN WILLIAM.--The Life and Times of Sir Thomas Gresham;
compiled chiefly from his correspondence preserved in Her Majesty's
state-paper office: including notices of his contemporaries. With
illustrations. By John William Burgon. . . . London: Robert Jennings, . . .
M DCCC XXXIX. _8vo, two volumes, half maroon morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._

Portrait by R. Woodman, proof before letters, facsimile, eight other
full-page illustrations, and numerous woodcuts in the text.


BURGOYNE, JOHN.--The Heiress. A Comedy in five acts. As performed at the
Theatre-Royal Drury-Lane. . . . London: printed for J. Debrett,
MDCCLXXXVI. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Riviere._

First edition. Title and A-O in fours. Dedication to the Earl of Derby,
dated Hartford Street, Feb. 1, 1786, and Prologue in verse by the Rt.
Hon. Richard Fitzpatrick.


BURGOYNE, JOHN.--The Dramatic and Poetical Works of the late Lieut. Gen.
J. Burgoyne; to which is prefixed, Memoirs of the Author. Embellished
with [4] copper-plates. London: printed by C. Whittingham . . . 1808.
_8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Smith-Mansell._

Large paper copy.


BURKE, BERNARD.--The Knightage of Great Britain and Ireland, [woodcuts]
London: Edward Churton, . . . [Bradbury and Evans]   1841. _12mo, ivory
calf, back and sides covered with a graceful floral and scroll design
in mosaic of various colours, inside panel of mosaic and gilt
representing a cathedral window, purple silk guards, gilt edges._

Dedication copy of John Maude with his arms painted in colour on vellum,
a duplicate frontispiece-title by H. Beckwith after J. E. Jones, and a
duplicate page of dedication, both coloured.


BURLINGTON FINE ARTS CLUB. Exhibition of Portrait Miniatures. [36
plates] London: printed for the Burlington Fine Arts Club. 1889. _4to,
buckram._


BURLINGTON FINE ARTS CLUB. Exhibition of Bookbindings. London: printed
for the Burlington Fine Arts Club. 1891. _Royal 4to, cloth, uncut
edges._

One hundred and thirteen coloured plates.


BURLINGTON FINE ARTS CLUB. Catalogue of a Collection of European Enamels
   From the Earliest date to the End of the XVII. Century. London:
printed for the Burlington Fine Arts Club. 1897. _Imperial 4to, green
buckram, uncut edges._

Seventy-two plates, some coloured.


BURLINGTON FINE ARTS CLUB. Exhibition of English Mezzotint Portraits
from circa 1750 to circa 1830   London   printed for the Burlington Fine
Arts Club   1902. _Folio, blue buckram, uncut edges._

Thirty plates after Van Dyck, Romney, Reynolds, Gainsborough, Lawrence,
and others.


BURNABY, CHARLES.--The Reform'd Wife. A Comedy: As it is Acted, At the
Theatre-Royal, in Drury-Lane. London, Printed for Thomas Bennet, at the
Half-Moon, in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1700. _4to, half sprinkled calf,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

A-G4 in fours, title on A1. Dedicated to Lord Lorn.


BURNAND, SIR FRANCIS COWLEY.--The Incompleat Angler. After Master Izaak
Walton. Edited by F. C. Burnand . . . and illustrated by Harry Furniss.
London: Bradbury, Agnew, & C^{o} . . . 1887. _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Thirty-one coloured illustrations.


BURNET, JOHN.--Practical Hints on Light and Shade in Painting.
Illustrated by Examples from the Italian, Flemish, and Dutch Schools. By
John Burnet. . . . London: printed for the proprietor, and sold by James
Carpenter and Son, . . . 1826. _4to, boards, uncut edges._

Large paper copy: thirty-nine illustrations [eight plates] on India
paper.


BURNET, JOHN.--[General title] A Treatise on Painting. In four parts.
Consisting of an Essay on the Education of the Eye with reference to
Painting, and practical hints on Composition, Chiaroscuro, and Colour.
The whole illustrated by Examples from the Italian, Venetian, Flemish,
and Dutch Schools. By John Burnet, . . . London: James Carpenter, . . .
[Chiswick Press] 1837. (I.) An Essay on the Education of the Eye with
reference to Painting. Illustrated by [8] copper plates and [5] wood
cuts. . . . Second edition. London: James Carpenter, . . . 1837. (II.)
Practical Hints on Composition in Painting. Illustrated by Examples from
the Great Masters of the Italian, Flemish, and Dutch Schools. . . .
Fifth edition. [9 plates] London: printed for the Proprietor, and sold
by James Carpenter and Son, . . . 1836. (III.) Practical Hints on Light
and Shade in Painting. . . . Fifth edition. [8 plates] London: James
Carpenter, . . . 1838. (IV.) Practical Hints on Colour in Painting.
Illustrated by Examples from the Works of the Venetian, Flemish, and
Dutch Schools. . . . Fourth edition. [8 plates] London: printed for the
proprietor, . . . 1835. _Royal 4to, four parts in one volume, cloth,
uncut edges._

120 figures on 33 plates.


BURNET AND CUNNINGHAM.--Turner and his Works: illustrated with [10]
Examples from his Pictures, and critical remarks on his principles of
painting. By John Burnet, F.R.S. . . . the Memoir by Peter Cunningham,
F.S.A. . . . Re-edited by Henry Murray, F.S.A. London: James S. Virtue,
. . . 1859. _Royal 4to, cloth, uncut edges._

Second edition. Dedicated to Samuel Rogers.


BURNET, THOMAS.--A Second Tale of a Tub: or, The History of Robert
Powel the Puppet-Show-Man. . . . London: Printed for J. Roberts . . .
1715. . . . _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt fillets on the sides, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece and preliminary leaf containing the Imprimatur, dated Oct.
16, 1714.

A satire on Sir Robert Walpole, sometimes attributed to Thomas Duffet.
The Jolley copy.


BURNEY, CHARLES.--A General History of Music, from the earliest ages, to
the present period. To which is prefixed, a Dissertation on the Music of
the Ancients. By Charles Burney . . . London, printed for the Author . . .
MDCCLXXVI.-LXXXIX. _4to, four volumes, calf, gilt back._

Brilliant portrait of the author engraved by Bartolozzi after Reynolds,
and ten other plates, including five by Bartolozzi after the designs of
Cipriani.

Dr. Samuel Johnson is believed to have written the Preface.


BURNEY, CHARLES.--Memoirs of Doctor Burney, arranged from his own
manuscripts, from family papers, and from personal recollections. By his
Daughter, Madame d'Arblay. . . . London: Edward Moxon . . . [Bradbury
and Evans]   1832. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, original boards, uncut
edges._


BURNEY, FANNY.--See D'Arblay, Madame.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems chiefly in the Scottish Dialect, by Robert Burns.
[Four lines of English verse]   Kilmarnock: printed by John Wilson.
M,DCC,LXXXVI. _8vo, green straight-grain morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, the original blue covers bound in, blue straight-grain
morocco case, by Bedford._

First edition. Autograph letter of Burns (two pages) inserted.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems, chiefly in the Scottish Dialect. By Robert Burns.
Kilmarnock: printed by John Wilson, M.DCC.LXXXVI [_rep. 1867_].
_Imperial 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by
Bedford._

No. 12 of fifty largest paper copies printed.

Eighty-seven plates have been inserted in this copy, many proofs, and
some of Stothard's illustrations retouched for the engraver. At the end
is bound a facsimile of the original manuscript of the "Jolly Beggars,"
Glasgow, 1823.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems, chiefly in the Scottish dialect. By Robert Burns.
Edinburgh: printed for the author, and sold by William Creech.
M,DCC,LXXXVII. _8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt
top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First issue of the first Edinburgh edition, with the misprints
"stinking" and "haggis" in the last stanza on page 263.

Portrait by Beugo after A. Nasmyth, and an original water-colour
drawing by Uwins, representing the witches in the church in "Tam O'
Shanter."


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems, chiefly in the Scottish dialect. By Robert Burns.
Edinburgh: printed for the author, and sold by William Creech.
M,DCC,LXXXVII. _8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Zaehnsdorf._

Second issue of the first Edinburgh edition, with the errors on page 263
corrected to "skinking" and "Haggis."

Portrait by Beugo after A. Nasmyth.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems, chiefly in the Scottish dialect. By Robert Burns.
The third edition. London: printed for A. Strahan; T. Cadell in the
Strand; and W. Creech, Edinburgh. M DCC LXXXVII. _8vo, green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First London edition, copied from the first issue of the first Edinburgh
edition, with the misprints in the last stanza of the poem "To a
Haggis," on page 267.

Portrait by Beugo after A. Nasmyth.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems, chiefly in the Scottish Dialect. By Robert Burns.
Philadelphia: printed for, and sold by Peter Stewart and George Hyde
M,DCC,LXXXVIII. _12mo, olive levant morocco, richly tooled on back and
sides, gilt edges, by Lortic._

First American edition, published in April. The text of this edition
gives unmistakable evidence that it was printed from the first issue of
the first Edinburgh edition, with the two errors in the lines, "To a
Haggis."


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems, chiefly in the Scottish dialect. By Robert Burns.
To which are added, Scots Poems, selected from the works of Robert
Ferguson. New York: printed by J. and A. M'Lean, Franklin's Head, No.
41, Hanover-Square. M,DCC,LXXXVIII. _Post 8vo, green levant morocco,
gilt back, wide side borders of interlacing fillets and foliage, doubled
with green morocco, green silk guard, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Second American edition, published in June. Printed from the first issue
of the first Edinburgh edition, with the two errors in the poem "To a
Haggis," last stanza, page 187.

Portrait by Scot.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems, chiefly in the Scottish dialect. By Robert Burns.
Belfast: printed and sold by William Magee, . . . M,DCC,XC. _12mo, green
morocco, gilt and mosaic back, side panels in mosaic of orange, red,
ivory, and maroon morocco, the intervals studded with dots, corner
ornaments in gilt and red mosaic, gilt edges, by "E. S. Aurifex" [Sir
Edward Sullivan]._

The misprints in the last stanza of the poem, "To a Haggis," are
repeated, page 187.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems, chiefly in the Scottish Dialect. By Robert Burns
. . . . The second edition considerably enlarged. Edinburgh: printed for
T. Cadell, London, and William Creech, Edinburgh. M.DCC.XCIII. _8vo, two
volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

Portrait by Beugo after Nasmyth.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems. 1793. _8vo, two volumes in one, original half
calf, uncut edges, in a maroon morocco case._

Another copy, on the verso of the half-title of which is the following
presentation inscription: "Mr. White will accept of this Book as a mark
of the most sincere Friendship, from a man who has ever had too much
respect for his Friends, & too much contempt for his enemies, to flatter
either the one or the other--The Author."

In the back of the book is pasted a folio sheet containing stanzas "To
the Memory of Robert Burns. By T. White, author of St. Guerdun's Well,"
dated Dumfries, 1796.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems, chiefly in the Scottish Dialect. By Robert Burns
. . . A new edition, considerably enlarged. Edinburgh: printed for T.
Cadell jun. and W. Davies, London; and William Creech, Edinburgh.
MDCCXCVIII. _8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Riviere._

Portrait by Beugo after Nasmyth.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems ascribed to Robert Burns, the Ayrshire bard, not
contained in any edition of his works hitherto published. Glasgow,
printed by Chapman & Lang, for Thomas Stewart, . . . 1801. _8vo, green
levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._


BURNS, ROBERT.--(I.-IV.) The Works of Robert Burns; with an account of
his life, and a criticism on his writings. To which are prefixed, some
observations on the character and condition of the Scottish Peasantry
. . . . The second edition. London: printed for T. Cadell, Jun. and W.
Davies, . . . 1801. Printed by R. Noble, . . . (V.) Reliques of Robert
Burns; consisting chiefly of original letters, poems, and critical
observations on Scottish songs. Collected and published by R. H. Cromek
. . . . London: printed by J. M'Creery, for T. Cadell, and W. Davies,
. . . 1808. _8vo, five volumes, calf, gilt back._

Large paper copy. Portrait by Neagle after Nasmyth.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Select Scotish Songs, ancient and modern; with critical
observations and biographical notices, by Robert Burns. Edited By R. H.
Cromek . . . [vignette]   London: printed for T. Cadell and W. Davies,
. . . By J. M'Creery, . . . 1810. _Crown 8vo, two volumes in one, half
blue levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems by Robert Burns: with an account of his Life And
Miscellaneous remarks on his writings. Containing also many poems and
letters, Not printed in Dr. Currie's edition . . . Edinburgh: printed
for the Trustees of the late James Morison, by John Moir . . . 1811.
_Royal 8vo, two volumes, half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Allo._

Twenty plates by Burnet and (inserted) four portraits and eleven
additional plates, seven being India proofs.


BURNS, ROBERT.--The Works of Robert Burns; with his life, by Allan
Cunningham. . . . London: John Cochrane and Co. . . . 1834. _Post 8vo,
eight volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait, frontispieces, and engraved titles, sixteen plates in all.


BURNS, ROBERT.--The Poetical Works of Robert Burns [with a Memoir by Sir
Harris Nicolas, and a portrait of Burns]   London   William Pickering
1839. _Foolscap 8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


BURNS, ROBERT.--The Works of Robert Burns; with a complete life of the
poet, and an essay on his genius and character, by Professor Wilson.
Also numerous notes, annotations, and appendices. Embellished by
eighty-one portraits and landscape illustrations. . . . Blackie and Son,
. . . Glasgow, . . . M DCCC XLVI. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, cloth, gilt
top, uncut edges._


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems, chiefly in the Scottish Dialect. By Robert Burns.
[Posthumous Poems]   Kilmarnock: printed by James M'Kie   M.DCCCLXIX.
_Imperial 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by
Bedford._

No. 15 of thirty copies printed on largest paper. Forty-six plates
inserted, including eight portraits of Burns, one an original drawing.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Poems, chiefly in the Scottish Dialect. By Robert Burns.
[Poems as they appeared in the early Edinburgh edition]   Kilmarnock:
printed by James M'Kie M.DCCCLXIX. _Imperial 8vo, green levant morocco,
gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Bedford._

No. 15 of thirty copies printed on largest paper. Ninety-eight plates
inserted, including eight portraits.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Songs, chiefly in the Scottish Dialect. By Robert Burns.
Kilmarnock: printed by James M'Kie. M.DCCCLXIX. _Imperial 8vo, green
levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Bedford._

No. 15 of thirty copies printed on largest paper. In this copy ninety
plates have been inserted, including seven portraits of Burns, and
illustrations on copper and steel after designs by Stothard and others.
Many of the plates are in two states, before and after letters, a fair
proportion being on India paper.


BURNS, ROBERT.--The Poetical Works of Robert Burns edited from the best
printed and manuscript authorities, with glossarial index and a
biographical memoir   By Alexander Smith. . . . London: Macmillan & Co.
   1879. _Post 8vo, two volumes, boards, uncut edges._

Portrait on India paper by G. B. Shaw after J. Nasmith. One of five
hundred copies printed.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Selected Poems of Robert Burns with an introduction by
Andrew Lang. London   Kegan Paul, Trench, Truebner & C^{o}. Ltd. MDCCCXCI.
_Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed.


BURNS, ROBERT.--Letters addressed to Clarinda, &c. By Robert Burns, the
Ayrshire poet. Never before Published. Glasgow: Printed by Niven, Napier
and Rhull; For T. Stewart . . . 1802. _Small 8vo, green morocco, gilt
back and sides, gilt edges, by Bedford._


BURTON, JOHN HILL.--The Book-Hunter etc. By John Hill Burton. William
Blackwood & Sons   Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLXII. _Foolscap 8vo, half
morocco, uncut edges._

First edition.


BURTON, JOHN HILL.--The Book-Hunter etc. 1862. _Square 8vo, half olive
morocco, uncut edges._

Large paper copy of the first edition, twenty-five printed.


BURTON, JOHN HILL.--The Book Hunter, etc. By John Hill Burton . . . A
new edition with a Memoir of the Author   William Blackwood and Sons
Edinburgh: . . . MDCCCLXXXII. _4to, light brown levant morocco, gilt and
mosaic back, mosaic side compartments in maroon and green morocco,
richly tooled, silk linings, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

One thousand copies printed. Etched portrait of the author by W. B.
Hole.


BURTON, JOHN HILL.--A History of the Reign of Queen Anne by John Hill
Burton, . . . William Blackwood and Sons   Edinburgh and London   M DCCC
LXXX . . . _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


BURTON, SIR RICHARD F.--(I.) Benares: M DCCC LXXXV: printed by the
Kamashastra Society for private subscribers only. . . . A plain and
literal translation of the Arabian Nights' Entertainments, now entituled
the Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night with introduction
explanatory notes on the manners and customs of Moslem men and a
terminal essay upon the history of The Nights by Richard F. Burton
(XI.) Benares: M DCCC LXXXVI: printed &c . . . Supplemental Nights to
the Thousand Nights and a Night with notes anthropological and
explanatory by Richard F. Burton. _8vo, sixteen volumes, original cloth,
red top._

The Supplement consists of six volumes.


BURTON, SIR RICHARD.--See Basile, Giovanni Battista.


BURY, LADY CHARLOTTE.--Diary illustrative of the Times of George the
Fourth, interspersed with original letters from the late Queen Caroline,
and from various other distinguished persons. . . . London: Henry
Colburn, . . . M DCCC XXXVIII. _8vo, two volumes, half red levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


BURY, RICHARD DE.--Philobiblon, a Treatise on the Love of Books, by
Richard de Bury, . . . First American edition, with the literal English
translation of John B. Inglis. Collated and corrected, with notes, by
Samuel Hand. Albany: Joel Munsell. M DCCC LXI. _Crown 8vo, half brown
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

One of thirty large paper copies printed.


BURY, RICHARD DE.--The Philobiblon of Richard de Bury Bishop of Durham
Treasurer and Chancellor of Edward III   Edited and Translated by
Ernest C. Thomas . . . London   Kegan Paul, Trench and Co. [Chiswick
Press] 1888. _8vo, original paper, uncut edges._

No. 33 of fifty large paper copies printed.


BURY, RICHARD DE.--(I.) Ricardi de Bury Philobiblon ex Optimis Codicibus
Recensuit Versione Anglica necnon et Prolegomenis Adnotationibusque
Auxit Andreas Fleming West in Collegio Princetoniae Professor Pars Prima.
Textus. Novi Eboraci [** symbol] Typis et Impensis Societatis Grolierianae
   MDCCCLXXXIX. (II-III.) The Philobiblon of Richard de Bury edited from
the best manuscripts and translated into English with an introduction
and notes by Andrew Fleming West . . . Part second . . . [Part third]
New York   printed for the Grolier Club   1889. _4to, three volumes,
citron levant morocco, gilt back, side panels, doubled with citron
morocco, borders and corner ornaments, vellum guards, gilt top, uncut
edges, by David._

One of two hundred and ninety-seven copies printed.


BURY, RICHARD DE.--Philobiblon. 1889. _4to, three volumes, red levant
morocco, gilt back, side borders, doubled with vellum, borders, gilt
over uncut edges, in maroon levant morocco cases, by Cuzin._

One of three copies printed upon vellum.


BUTLER, CHARLES.--The Life of Hugo Grotius: with brief minutes of the
civil, ecclesiastical, and literary history of the Netherlands. By
Charles Butler . . . London: John Murray . . . M.DCCC.XXVI. _8vo, half
brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


BUTLER, FRANCES ANNE.--See Kemble, Fanny.


BUTLER, JOSEPH, BISHOP.--The Analogy of Religion, Natural and Revealed,
to the Constitution and Course of Nature. To which are added Two brief
Dissertations: I. Of Personal Identity. II. Of the Nature of Virtue. By
Joseph Butler, LL.D. Rector of Stanhope, in the Bishoprick of Durham. . . .
London: Printed for James, John and Paul Knapton, at the Crown in
Ludgate Street. M DCC XXXVI. _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back, side
borders, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with the half-title.


BUTLER, JOSEPH, BISHOP.--The Analogy of Religion, natural and revealed
to the constitution and course of Nature. By Joseph Butler L.L.D. late
Lord Bishop of Durham. With Analytical Index by Edward Steere . . .
London. Bell and Daldy . . . 1857. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt edges, by Bedford._


BUTLER, JOSEPH, BISHOP.--The Works of . . . Joseph Butler . . . late
Lord Bishop of Durham. To which is prefixed, a Preface, giving some
account of the character and writings of the author. By Samuel Halifax,
D.D., late Lord Bishop of Gloucester. Oxford: at the University Press
MDCCCXLIX. _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back, by Hayday._


BUTLER, LILLY.--A Discourse, proving, That the Faith and Practice of
True Christians, Are no Just Matter of Shame or Reproach. Being Eight
Sermons Preached at the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, in the Year 1709,
at the Lecture Founded by the Honourable Robert Boyle, Esq;. By Lilly
Butler, . . . London: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, . . . 1711. _8vo, old
blue morocco, gilt back and sides, with the crowned cipher of Queen Anne
on both covers, gilt edges._

From the collection of Francis Wrangham, with his autograph on the
title-page.


BUTLER, WILLIAM ALLEN.--Home Poems and Rhymes for the Nursery with "Sea
Scribblings" and "The Animal Book"   by William Allen Butler   Printed
for private circulation   New York   printed at the De Vinne Press
1897. _12mo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

One hundred and fifty copies printed, with portrait and one other
illustration.


BYERLEY, THOMAS.--Relics of Literature. By Stephen Collet. [Thomas
Byerley]   London: Thomas Boys . . 1823. _8vo, half olive morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges._

Byerley had still another _nom de guerre_. He was the "Reuben Percy" of
the Percy Anecdotes.

The two hundred subjects in this volume include Book Destroyers, the
Ancient Value of Books, Voltaire and the Booksellers, etc., etc. A leaf
of facsimile autographs precedes the title.


BYERLEY, THOMAS.--See Percy Anecdotes.


BYROM, JOHN.--Miscellaneous Poems, by John Byrom, M.A. F.R.S. sometime
Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, And Inventor of The Universal
English Short-Hand. . . . Manchester: Printed by J. Harrop. M DCC
LXXIII. _8vo, two volumes, original calf._

Inserted is a portrait of Dr. Byron [_sic_] "A Sketch after spending an
Evening at a Coffee House."


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Hours of Idleness, a series of poems,
original and translated, By George Gordon, Lord Byron, a minor . . .
Newark: Printed and sold by S. and J. Ridge; . . . 1807. _8vo, maroon
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

Large paper copy of the first edition of Byron's first publication.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Hours of Idleness: a Series of Poems,
original and translated. By Lord Byron . . . London: printed for Sherwin
and Co. . . . 1820. _12mo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Thick paper copy, with frontispiece.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers. A
Satire.

/p
    I had rather be a kitten, and cry, mew!
    Than one of these same metre ballad-mongers.
p/

SHAKSPEARE.

/p
    Such shameless Bards we have; and yet 't is true,
    There are as mad, abandon'd Critics too.
p/

POPE.

London: printed for James Cawthorn, British Library, No. 24, Cockspur
Street. [1809]. _12mo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, side borders,
gilt top, uncut edges, the original brown paper front cover bound in, by
The Club Bindery._

Presumably the first edition, with a misprint "Aulhor," line 4 of the
Preface.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers. A
Satire . . . London: Printed for James Cawthorn . . . [1809.]   _12mo,
green straight-grain morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Presumably the second edition, with the misprint "Aulhor," line 4 of the
Preface, corrected. A thick paper copy.

The type of the title-page is larger and heavier than in the preceding
edition; the ornament above the imprint is two arrow-like figures joined
by a slender thread, whereas in the first edition it is two parallel
lines, the upper much the heavier of the two. "Printed" here begins with
a large "P" and "James Cawthorn" is in larger type.

The text is reset throughout. The ornament on B1 recto has here a
star-like centre; in the first edition it is an elongated diamond. The
parallel head-lines beginning on page 2 are here heavier. On page 5,
line 47, "wizard" is spelled with one "z"; in the first edition with
two. "Dispatch" in the same line is spelled with an "i"; in the first
with an "e." Other slight variations of punctuation, etc., are
observable on nearly every page.

The present copy has a half-title.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--English Bards and Scotch Reviewers. By Lord
Byron with the additional passages from the subsequent editions
Illustrated with Forty Engravings   [London]   1815. _4to, blue
straight-grain morocco, gilt edges._

Unique copy, from the Drury collection, with special title-page as
above, the original text inlaid to quarto. Manuscript interpolations
written in a neat hand show the various changes in the poem. The
portraits are well selected and include a coloured print of Madame
Catalani.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--The Giaour, a fragment of a Turkish Tale.
By Lord Byron . . . London: . . . John Murray . . . 1813. _8vo, silk
covers, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Lara, a tale. Jacqueline, a tale. London:
printed for J. Murray . . . 1814. _Small 8vo, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--The Corsair, a tale. By Lord Byron. London:
. . . John Murray . . . 1814. _8vo, silk covers, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Hebrew Melodies. By Lord Byron. London:
printed for John Murray . . . 1815. _8vo, silk covers, uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--The Prisoner of Chillon, and other poems.
By Lord Byron. London: printed for John Murray . . . 1816. _8vo, silk
covers, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--The Siege of Corinth. A Poem. Parisina. A
Poem. London: printed for John Murray . . . 1816. _8vo, silk covers,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Lord Byron's Farewell to England; with
three other poems, viz. Ode to St. Helena, To my Daughter, on the
morning of her birth, and To the Lily of France. . . . London: published
by J. Johnston, . . . 1816. _8vo, silk covers, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Manfred, a dramatic poem. By Lord Byron.
London: John Murray . . . 1817. _8vo, silk covers, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Mazeppa, a poem. By Lord Byron. London:
John Murray . . . 1819. _8vo, silk covers, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Don Juan. . . . London: printed by Thomas
Davison, Whitefriars. 1819. _4to, green straight-grain morocco, gilt
back and sides, gilt top, by Birdsall & Son, Northampton._

First edition of Cantos I and II.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Don Juan . . . London: printed by Thomas
Davison . . . 1819. Don Juan, Cantos III, IV, and V. London: printed by
Thomas Davison . . . 1821. Don Juan. Cantos VI.-VII.- and VIII . . .
London, 1823: Printed for John Hunt . . . Don Juan. Cantos IX.-X.- and
XI . . . London, 1823: Printed for John Hunt . . . Don Juan. Cantos
XII.-XIII.- and XIV. London, 1823: Printed for John Hunt . . . Don Juan.
Cantos XV. and XVI. London, 1824: Printed for John and H. L. Hunt . . .
_8vo, six volumes in three, green morocco, gilt ornaments on back and
sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Birdsall._

First octavo edition, and first editions of all but the first two
Cantos. The second volume has the original wrapper with the following
inscription in Byron's handwriting: "From the Author to T. Grant with
his best regards."


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Waltz: an apostrophic hymn. By Horace
Hornem, Esq. (The noble author of Don Juan.) . . . London: printed and
published by W. Clark, . . . 1821. _8vo, silk covers, uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery._


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Marino Faliero, Doge of Venice. An
historical tragedy, in five acts. With notes. The Prophecy of Dante, a
poem. By Lord Byron. London: John Murray . . . 1821. _8vo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Letter to **** ******, on the Rev. W. L.
Bowles' Strictures on the Life and Writings of Pope. By the Right Hon.
Lord Byron. . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1821. _8vo, silk covers,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Sardanapalus, a tragedy. The Two Foscari, a
tragedy. Cain, a mystery. By Lord Byron. London: John Murray . . . 1821.
_8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition. Portrait of Byron engraved by Page.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Werner, a tragedy. By Lord Byron. London:
John Murray . . . 1823. _8vo, silk covers, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition. Published in December, 1822.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--The Age of Bronze; or, Carmen Seculare et
Annus haud mirabilis. . . . London, 1823: printed for John Hunt, . . .
_8vo, silk covers, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--The Island, or Christian and his Comrades.
By the Right Hon. Lord Byron. London, 1823: printed for John Hunt . . .
_8vo, silk covers, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--The Parliamentary Speeches of Lord Byron.
Printed from the copies prepared by His Lordship for publication.
London: printed for Rodwell and Martin, . . . 1824. _8vo, silk covers,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--The Deformed Transformed; a drama. By the
Right Hon. Lord Byron. London, 1824: printed for J. and H. L. Hunt, . . .
_8vo, silk covers, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--The Works of Lord Byron: with his Letters
and Journals, and his Life, by Thomas Moore . . . London: John Murray . . .
1832-'33. _Foolscap 8vo, seventeen volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First issue. Portrait and thirty-three frontispieces and vignettes.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--The Poetical Works of Lord Byron . . .
London: John Murray, . . . M DCCC XXXIX. _8vo, eight volumes, original
cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait by E. Finden after T. Phillips, and one hundred and thirty-four
portraits and views, including frontispieces by E. and W. Finden, etc.,
after the designs of Stanfield, Westall, Turner, and others.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Poetical Works. 1839. . . . _8vo, eight
volumes extended to fifteen, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by Matthews._

Another copy, extra-illustrated by the insertion of five hundred and
thirty selected engravings, for the most part proofs on India paper and
generally before letters, and an autograph, Pass "below the Bar of the
House of Lords" in favour of John Galt, by Byron. The plates include the
Stothard, Finden, Johannot, Westall, Turner, Corbould, and other series,
a brilliant group of portraits, and many unpublished plates. The
portraits include sixteen of Byron.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Childe Harold's Pilgrimage. A Romaunt. By
Lord Byron. London: John Murray . . . MDCCCXLI. _Royal 8vo, brown
morocco, back and sides panelled in mosaic with foliated ornaments,
inside border, tapestry panels and end leaves, gilt over uncut edges, by
Marius Michel._

Proofs on India paper of the sixty-two engravings by Finden, after the
designs of Creswick, Warren, Aylmer, etc.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Poetry of Byron chosen and arranged by
Matthew Arnold. [vignette]   London   Macmillan and Co.   1881. _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Fugitive Pieces by George Gordon Lord Byron
a fac-simile reprint of the suppressed edition of 1806   London
printed for private circulation [Chiswick Press]   1886. _Royal 4to,
boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 51 of one hundred copies printed.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the
right honourable Lord Byron with anecdotes of some of his
contemporaries. London: printed for Henry Colburn and Co. 1822. _8vo,
boards, uncut edges._

Portrait by G. H. Harlowe, on India paper.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--Conversations of Lord Byron with the
Countess of Blessington . . . London: published for Henry Colburn, by R.
Bentley, . . . 1834. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Portrait of Byron after Count d'Orsay.


BYRON, GEORGE GORDON, LORD.--See Clinton, George. Hunt, Leigh. The
Liberal.


CAMBRIDGE, RICHARD OWEN.--The Scribleriad: an heroic poem. In six books
[vignette]   London: Printed for R. Dodsley . . . M DCC LI. _Royal 4to,
olive levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges._

First edition: with notes by George Chalmers. Seven plates by L. P.
Boitard after J. Wall and Boitard, and vignette of Tully on the title,
by C. Mosley after H. Gravelot.


CAMEO.--The Cameo; a Melange of Literature and the Arts selected from
the Bijou. London   William Pickering. MDCCCXXXI. _Post 8vo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Fifteen plates after Lawrence, Wilkie, Reynolds, etc.


CAMPBELL, JOHN, LORD.--The Lives of the Lord Chancellors and Keepers of
the Great Seal of England, from the earliest times till the reign of
King George IV. By John Lord Campbell, . . . Third edition. London: John
Murray, . . . 1848. [-1869]. _8vo, eight volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


CAMPBELL, JOHN, LORD.--Lives of Lord Lyndhurst and Lord Brougham, Lord
Chancellors and Keepers of the Great Seal of England. By the late John
Lord Campbell, . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1869. _8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


CAMPBELL, JOHN, LORD.--The Lives of the Chief Justices of England. From
the Norman Conquest till the death of Lord Mansfield. By John Lord
Campbell . . . London: John Murray . . . 1849. [-1857]   _8vo, three
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--The Pleasures of Hope; with other Poems. By Thomas
Campbell. Edinburgh: printed for Mundell & Son; . . . 1799. _Small 8vo,
red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Ramage._

First edition. Four plates engraved by Scott, Somerville, and Mitchell
after the designs of Graham.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--(I.) The Pleasures of Hope, with other poems. By
Thomas Campbell . . . London: printed for Longman, . . . 1825. (II.)
Gertrude of Wyoming, and other poems. By Thomas Campbell . . . Ninth
edition. London: printed for Longman, . . . 1825. _12mo, two volumes in
one, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, the fore edge bearing a
beautifully painted landscape in the neighbourhood of Eton College._

The first of these volumes has an engraved title and three plates, the
second an engraved title and two plates, all by Heath after Westall's
designs.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--Theodric; a domestic tale; and Other Poems. By Thomas
Campbell. London: printed for Longman, . . . 1824. _Small 8vo, red
levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Ramage._

First edition, printed on thick paper.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--The Poetical Works of Thomas Campbell. London: Henry
Colburn, . . . 1828. _8vo, two volumes, red levant, gilt back panels and
side borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Portrait by J. Burnet after Sir Thomas Lawrence and in addition forty
portraits and scenes, for the most part proofs on India paper,
including fifteen portraits of Campbell, Westall's illustrations to the
Poems, proofs before and after the letters.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--The Poetical Works of Thomas Campbell. London: Edward
Moxon . . . MDCCCXXXVII. _Small 4to, red levant morocco, back and corner
ornaments, gilt top, uncut edges, by Ramage._

Portrait and twenty vignettes after the designs of Turner.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--Poetical Works. 1837. _Small 4to, citron levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by Brany._

Another copy. Inserted are a portrait of Campbell by Holl and an
illustration to the "Pleasures of Hope" by Westall, proof on India
paper.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--The Pilgrim of Glencoe, and other poems. By Thomas
Campbell. London: Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXLII. _Small 4to, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Stikeman._

Sixty-seven plates inserted, many India proofs, including ten portraits,
views by Turner, vignettes, etc.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--The Poetical Works of Thomas Campbell. With notes,
and a biographical sketch, by the Rev. W. A. Hill, . . . Illustrated by
thirty-seven wood-cuts. From designs by Harvey. London: Edward Moxon, . . .
1851. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait by W. H. Watt after Lawrence.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--The Poetical Works of Thomas Campbell. With a Memoir
. . . . Boston: Little, Brown, and Company. 1866. _12mo, half green cloth,
uncut edges._

No. 13 of one hundred large paper copies printed, with portrait on India
paper.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--Specimens of the British Poets; with Biographical and
Critical Notices, and an Essay on English Poetry. By Thomas Campbell.
London: John Murray . . . 1819. _8vo, seven volumes, green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt tops, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Illustrated by the insertion of fifty-two portraits of the Poets, thirty
being on India paper, many proofs before letters. Included is the rare
portrait of Sir Thomas Overbury by Payne, James I. by Gaywood, and
Southerne by Evans.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--Specimens of the British Poets. 1819. _8vo, seven
volumes, half citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Allo._

Another copy, with one hundred and fifty-three portraits and vignettes
inserted, ninety being proofs on India paper, and many before letters.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--Life of Mrs. Siddons. By Thomas Campbell. London:
Effingham Wilson . . . 1834. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Mrs. Siddons by Lupton after Sir Thomas Lawrence.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--Life of Mrs. Siddons. 1834. _8vo, two volumes, citron
levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back and sides elaborately tooled in the
manner of Derome, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

Another copy, illustrated by the insertion of one hundred and eighty-six
portraits, etc., including forty-one portraits of Mrs. Siddons, a
brilliant mezzotint of E. Kean, coloured portrait of Kynaston, and a
water-colour drawing of Glasgow Cathedral. A large number of the plates
are in proof state.


CAMPBELL, THOMAS.--Life of Mrs. Siddons. 1834. _8vo, two volumes,
extended to four, red morocco, gilt edges._

William Upcott's copy, containing in addition to the portrait of Mrs.
Siddons, by Lupton after Sir Thomas Lawrence, two hundred and fourteen
portraits, of which sixty are of Mrs. Siddons, including the oval by
Ogborn after Harding, in two states, red (proof) and black, and the
"Grecian Daughter" by Trotter after Lawrence. Autographs and letters of
Mrs. Bracegirdle, Henry and Cecilia Siddons, E. Carll, Thomas Davies,
the Duchess of Devonshire and many others have been inserted, several
Bills of the Play, 1766, etc., a "pass" to the Gallery, written by Sarah
Siddons, a water-colour drawing of the actress's home at Westbourne and
a sepia drawing of her tomb at Paddington Church, together with a number
of contemporary newspaper announcements, etc.


CANNING, GEORGE.--Speeches of the Right Hon. George Canning delivered on
public occasions in Liverpool. With a portrait of Mr. Canning, [by W. T.
Fry after George Hargreaves] Liverpool: Thos. Kaye, . . . 1825. _8vo,
half cloth, uncut edges._


CARCANET.--The Carcanet, a literary album, containing select passages
from the most distinguished English writers. London   William Pickering
   MDCCCXXVIII. _18mo, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Riviere._

Engraved title with vignette.


CAREY, HENRY.--The Dramatick Works of Henry Carey. [Large ornament]
London: Printed by S. Gilbert, M DCC XLIII. _4to, red morocco, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Contains 1. Amelia, an opera set to music by John Frederick Lampe. 2.
Teraminta, an opera set to music by John Christopher Smith. 3. The
Dragon of Wantley, a burlesque opera with music by Lampe. 4. The
Dragoness, a burlesque opera with music by Lampe. 5. Chrononhotonthologos,
a tragedy. 6. The Contrivances, a ballad opera. 7. The Honest
Yorkshire-Man, a ballad opera. 8. Nancy: or, the Parting Lovers.
An Interlude set to music by the Author.


"CARLETON, GEORGE, CAPTAIN."--See Defoe, Daniel.


CARLETON, WILL.--Farm Ballads. By Will Carleton. Illustrated. New York:
Harper & Brothers, . . . [1882] _8vo, brown morocco, gilt edges._


CARLYLE, THOMAS.--Past and Present. By Thomas Carlyle . . . London:
Chapman and Hall . . . MDCCCXLIII. _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


CARLYLE, THOMAS.--Past and Present. By Thomas Carlyle . . . second
edition. London: Chapman and Hall . . . MDCCCXLV. _12mo, cloth, uncut
edges._


CARLYLE, THOMAS.--Critical and Miscellaneous Essays: collected and
republished. By Thomas Carlyle . . . third edition. London: Chapman and
Hall . . . MDCCCXLVII. _12mo, four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


CARLYLE, THOMAS.--The French Revolution: a History. By Thomas Carlyle . . .
third edition   London: Chapman and Hall . . . M.DCCC.XLVIII. _12mo,
three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


CARLYLE, THOMAS, _editor_.--Latter-Day Pamphlets. Edited by Thomas
Carlyle. London: Chapman and Hall . . . 1850. _Small 8vo, calf, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition. Includes The Present Time, Model Prisons, Downing Street,
The New Downing Street, Stump-Orator, Parliaments, Hudson's Statue and
Jesuitism.


CARLYLE AND EMERSON.--The Correspondence of Thomas Carlyle and Ralph
Waldo Emerson 1834-1872 . . . Boston   James R. Osgood and Company
1883. _8vo, two volumes, boards, uncut edges._

No. 143 of three hundred and fifty copies printed, with two etched
portraits by S. A. Schoff.


CARLYLE, THOMAS.--[Works]   Boston   Dana Estes and Charles E. Lauriat
1884. _8vo, twenty volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Bradstreet's._

One of thirty-five copies printed on Japanese paper, with 33 portraits
and 28 maps.


CARLYLE, THOMAS.--Sartor Resartus: the Life and Opinions of Herr
Teufelsdroeckh in three books by Thomas Carlyle   London   Kegan Paul,
Trench & Co.   MDCCCLXXXIX. _Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

One of fifty large paper copies printed, with etched portrait of the
author.


CARLYLE, THOMAS.--Two Note Books of Thomas Carlyle from 23d March 1822
to 16th May 1832. edited by Charles Eliot Norton   New York   The
Grolier Club   MDCCCXCVIII. _8vo, half morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

One of three hundred and eighty-seven copies printed, with two portraits
of Carlyle etched by Alfred Jones, and facsimiles of the original
manuscript.


CARPENTER, WILLIAM HOOKER.--Pictorial Notices: consisting of a Memoir of
Sir Anthony Van Dyck, with a Descriptive Catalogue of the Etchings
executed by him: and a variety of interesting particulars relating to
other Artists patronized by Charles I . . . By William Hooker Carpenter.
London: James Carpenter . . . 1844. _4to, calf, gilt back and side
panels, gilt top, uncut edges._

Two portraits by William Carpenter, and in addition forty-six inserted
plates, consisting of portraits by Van Dyck engraved by P. de Jode,
Bolswert, Galle, etc., etc., including a proof of the portrait of Peter
Oliver.


"CARROLL, LEWIS."--See Dodgson, Charles.


CARTER, CHARLES FRANKLIN.--The Missions of Nueva California   An
Historical Sketch by Charles Franklin Carter with illustrations from
drawings by the author, from photographs, and reproductions of old
prints   San Francisco   The Whitaker and Ray Company . . . 1900. _Royal
8vo, half cloth, uncut edges._


CARTER, R.--See Lowell, J. R. The Pioneer.


CARTWRIGHT, JULIA.--The Life and Art of Sandro Botticelli by Julia
Cartwright (Mrs. Ady) . . . New York: E. P. Dutton and Co.   London:
Duckworth and Co. [Chiswick Press] 1904. _4to, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Forty-two full-page plates, and thirty-seven illustrations in the text.


CARY, HENRY FRANCIS.--Lives of English Poets, from Johnson to Kirke
White, designed as a continuation of Johnson's Lives. By the late Rev.
Henry Francis Cary, . . . London: Henry G. Bohn, . . . M DCCC XLVI.
_Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


CARY, HENRY FRANCIS.--The Early French Poets, a series of notices and
translations, by the late Rev. Henry Francis Cary, . . . With an
introductory sketch of the history of French poetry, by his son the Rev.
Henry Cary, . . . London: Henry G. Bohn, . . . M DCCC XLVI. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


CARY, JOHN.--Cary's New Itinerary; or, an accurate delineation of the
Great Roads both direct and cross, throughout England and Wales; with
many of the principal Roads in Scotland . . . London: Printed for John
Cary . . . 1798. _8vo, red morocco, back and sides richly tooled, wide
inside border, green silk panel and linings, gilt over uncut edges, by
Roger Payne._

Printed on India paper. Dedicated to the Earl of Chesterfield and a
presentation copy from that nobleman.


CASTELLANI, CARLO.--Early Venetian Printing illustrated [portrait] . . .
London: John C. Nimmo . . . M. DCCC. XCV. _Folio, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._


CASTIGLIONE, A. P., _translator and editor_.--Il Cortegiano, or The
Courtier: written by Conte Baldssar Castiglione. And a new version of
the same into English. Together with Several of his Celebrated Pieces,
as well Latin as Italian, both in Prose and Verse. To which is prefix'd,
the Life of the Author. By A. P. Castiglione, of the same Family.
London: Printed by W. Bowyer, for the Editor. MDCCXXVII. _4to, brown
levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Portrait of the author engraved by Vertue. The original text and English
translation are printed in parallel columns.


CASTLE, EGERTON.--English Book-Plates   An illustrated handbook for
Students of Ex-Libris by Egerton Castle . . . London: George Bell &
Sons, . . . [Chiswick Press]   M dccc xcij. _8vo, vellum boards, uncut
edges._

Frontispiece in red and black, and numerous woodcuts in the text. No. 20
of sixty-five copies printed on Japanese vellum.


CATALOGUE.--Effigies of the most famous English Writers from Chaucer to
Johnson Exhibited at the Grolier Club   New-York, December, 1891.
[DeVinne Press] _8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

One of two hundred large paper copies printed, with two reproductions.


CATALOGUE.--Catalogue of an exhibition of Illuminated and Painted
Manuscripts together with a few early printed books with
illuminations--also some examples of Persian Manuscripts--with plates in
facsimile and an introductory essay   New-York the Grolier Club [De
Vinne Press] 1892. _8vo, olive levant morocco, Janseniste, uncut edges,
by R. W. Smith._

One of three hundred and fifty copies printed, with twenty-two plates in
facsimile.


CATALOGUE.--[** symbol] Catalogue of Original and Early Editions of
some of the Poetical and Prose Works of English Writers from
Langland to Wither   With Collations & Notes & Eighty-seven
Facsimiles of Title-pages and Frontispieces   Being a contribution
to the Bibliography of English Literature   ¶ Imprinted at New-York
for the Grolier Club, [De Vinne Press]   Mdcccxciij. _8vo, original half
brown morocco, uncut edges._

One of four hundred copies printed.


CATALOGUE.--[** symbol] Catalogue of Original and Early Editions. 1893.
_8vo, red levant morocco, Janseniste, uncut edges._

Another copy; one of three printed on vellum.


CATALOGUE.--The catalogue of books from the libraries or collections of
celebrated bibliophiles and illustrious persons of the past with arms or
devices upon the bindings exhibited at the Grolier Club in the month of
January 1895   New-York   published by the Grolier Club [De Vinne Press]
   MDCCCXCV. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

One of three hundred and fifty copies printed, with twenty-four
illustrations.


CATALOGUE.--The catalogue of books from the libraries or collections of
celebrated bibliophiles &c   1895. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back,
side panels, doubled with vellum, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy, one of three printed on vellum.


CATALOGUE.--A description of the Early Printed Books owned by The
Grolier Club with a brief account of their printers and the history of
typography in the fifteenth century   Printed for the Grolier Club
New-York, [De Vinne Press] May, MDCCCXCV. _Folio, half calf, uncut
edges._

One of four hundred copies printed, with twenty-five facsimiles   The
books described are from the collection of David Wolfe Bruce.


CATALOGUE.--A description of the Early Printed Books owned by the
Grolier club. 1895. _Folio, light brown levant morocco, gilt back, side
borders, doubled with vellum, vellum guards, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Another copy, one of three printed on vellum.


CATALOGUE of an exhibition illustrative of a Centenary of artistic
Lithography--1796-1896--With 244 examples by 160 different artists.
Illustrated with 20 photo-engravings, from the originals by Bonington,
Cassatt, Chauvel, Daumier, Decamps, Engelmann, Fantin-Latour, Gavarni,
Hanfstaengl, Homer, Jacque, Jacob, Millet, Newsam, Olis, Prout, Raffet,
Vernet, and Wagenbauer   At the Grolier Club . . . New York [De Vinne
Press]   March M.D.CCC.XCVI. _8vo, original paper wrappers, uncut
edges._

One of four hundred copies printed.


CATALOGUE of Etchings and Dry Points by Rembrandt selected for
exhibition at the Grolier Club of the city of New York   April-May, 1900
   New York   published by the Grolier Club [De Vinne Press]   M C M.
_Square 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

One of three hundred and ten copies printed, with etched frontispiece.


CATALOGUE of an Exhibition of first and other editions of the Works of
John Dryden (1631-1700) together with a few engraved portraits and two
oil paintings--commemorative of the two hundredth anniversary of his
death   New York   the Grolier Club [De Vinne Press]   1900. _8vo,
boards, uncut edges._

One of two hundred copies printed, with frontispiece.


CATALOGUE of an Exhibition of selected works of the Poets Laureate of
England   New York   the Grolier Club [De Vinne Press]   MCMI. _8vo,
boards, uncut edges._

One of three hundred copies printed, with portrait of Ben Jonson by S.
Arlent Edwards after Honthorst.


CATHOLIC RELIGION.--An Essay upon the Reasonableness and Usefulness of
the Catholick Religion. Humbly offered to the serious Consideration of
such Persons as may be unhappily seduced, either into Atheistick Doubts
&c   London, Printed and Sold by J. Roberts . . . 1722. _8vo, original
green morocco, back and sides covered with a floral design of English
workmanship, gilt edges._


CATLIN, GEORGE.--Letters and Notes on the Manners, Customs, and
Condition of the North American Indians. By Geo. Catlin. Written during
eight years' travel amongst the wildest tribes of Indians in North
America. In 1832, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, and 39. In two volumes, with
four hundred illustrations, carefully engraved from his original
paintings. . . . London: published by the author, . . . printed by
Tosswill and Myers, . . . 1841. . . . _Royal 8vo, two volumes, half red
levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Pratt._


CATO.--Cato's Moral Distichs Englished in Couplets. Philadelphia:
Printed and Sold by B. Franklin, 1735. _4to (12 leaves), green levant
morocco, gilt back, corner ornaments on the sides (Roger Payne style),
uncut edges, by Riviere._


"CATO PARVUS."--See Dibdin, T. F.


CATULLUS, CAIUS VALERIUS.--The Poems of Caius Valerius Catullus
translated. With a Preface and Notes by the Hon. George Lamb . . .
London: John Murray . . . 1821. _Post 8vo, two volumes in one, calf,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


CATULLUS, CAIUS VALERIUS.--The Poems of Catullus. Translated into
English Verse with an introduction and notes by Theodore Martin. London
   Parker Son and Brown . . . 1861. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


CATULLUS, CAIUS VALERIUS.--The Attis of Caius Valerius Catullus
Translated into English Verse, with Dissertations On the Myth of Attis,
on the Origin of Tree-Worship, and on the Galliambic Metre By Grant
Allen, B. A., formerly Postmaster of Merton College, Oxford. London.
MDCCCXCII. Published by David Nutt . . . _Royal 8vo, half vellum, uncut
edges._

No. 22 of sixty large paper copies printed.


CATULLUS, CAIUS VALERIUS.--The Carmina of Caius Valerius Catullus   Now
first completely Englished into Verse and Prose, the Metrical Part by
Capt. Sir Richard F. Burton, . . . and the Prose Portion, Introduction,
and Notes Explanatory and Illustrative by Leonard C. Smithers   London:
M DCCC XCIIII: printed for the Translators: . . . for private
subscribers only. _8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

Portrait by Blake after Della Rosa. No. 146 of one thousand copies
printed.


CAULFIELD, JAMES.--Calcographiana: the Print-sellers Chronicle and
Collectors Guide to the Knowledge and Value of Engraved British
Portraits. By James Caulfield   London: Printed by and for G. Smeeton
1814. _8vo, brown morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by J.
MacKenzie._

Illustrated by the insertion of ninety portraits, including originals by
Faithorne, White and Magdalen de Passe, also the portrait of Henry,
Prince of Wales, from the Hieroologia.

From the collection of John Allan.


CAURTIER, PETER L.--See Courtier, Peter L.


CAVALCASELLE, G. B.--See Crowe and Cavalcaselle.


CAXTON CELEBRATION.--See Bullen, George.


CELLINI, BENVENUTO.--Memoirs of Benvenuto Cellini, a Florentine artist;
written by himself. Containing a variety of information respecting the
arts, and the history of the sixteenth century. Third edition. Corrected
and enlarged from the last Milan edition. With the notes and
observations of G. P. Carpani, now first translated by Thomas Roscoe, . . .
London: printed for Henry Colburn and Co.   M DCCC XXIII. _8vo, two
volumes, half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait by J. Collyer after G. Vasari.


CERVANTES-SAAVEDRA, MIGUEL DE.--Don Quixote de la Mancha. Translated
from the Spanish of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. Embellished with
engravings from pictures painted by Robert Smirke . . . London: printed
for T. Cadell and W. Davies . . . by W. Bulwer and C^{o} . . . 1818. _4to,
four volumes, russia, gilt back and sides._

Largest paper, with proofs on India paper of the forty-eight plates and
twenty-six vignettes, engraved by Anker Smith, Heath, Engleheart,
Warren, Raimbach, Fittler, etc.


CERVANTES-SAAVEDRA, MIGUEL DE.--The Exemplary Novels of Miguel de
Cervantes Saavedra, the Author of Don Quixote de la Mancha, published at
Madrid in 1613; so called, because in each of them he proposed Useful
Example, to be either imitated or avoided   London: printed for T.
Cadell . . . 1822. _8vo, two volumes, calf, citron edges over rough
leaves, by Bedford._


CERVANTES-SAAVEDRA, MIGUEL DE.--The History and Adventures of the
renowned Don Quixote: from the Spanish of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra.
By T. Smollett, M. D. To which is prefixed a Memoir of the Author, by
Thomas Roscoe. Illustrated by George Cruikshank. . . . London: Effingham
Wilson, . . . 1833. _Post 8vo, three volumes, half maroon levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by V. Krafft._

Three imaginary portraits by J. Smith after Meadows, and fifteen other
plates by Cruikshank.


CERVANTES-SAAVEDRA, MIGUEL DE.--Don Quixote de la Mancha. Translated
from the Spanish of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, by Charles Jarvis,
Esq. carefully revised and corrected. Illustrated by Tony Johannot.
London: J. J. Dubochet & Co., . . . 1837. [1838, 1839]. _Royal 8vo,
three volumes, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Matthews._

Extra-illustrated by the insertion of a few portraits, views, etc.


CERVANTES-SAAVEDRA, MIGUEL DE.--The Exemplary Novels of Miguel de
Cervantes Saavedra: to which are added El Buscapie, or, the Serpent; and
La Tia Fingida, or, the Pretended Aunt. Translated from the Spanish by
Walter K. Kelly. London: Henry G. Bohn . . . MDCCCLV. _Post 8vo, half
blue morocco, uncut edges._

Portrait of Cervantes by Hinchliff after Van der Gucht.


CESNOLA, LOUIS PALMA DI.--Cyprus: its ancient cities, tombs, and
temples. A narrative of researches and excavations during ten years'
residence in that island   By General Louis Palma di Cesnola, . . . with
maps and illustrations. New York: Harper & Brothers, . . . 1878. _8vo,
cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Presentation copy from the author.


CHAFFERS, WILLIAM.--Marks and Monograms on Pottery & Porcelain of the
renaissance and modern periods, with Historical Notices of each
Manufactory, preceded by an introductory essay on the Vasa Fictilia of
the Greek, Romano-British, and Mediaeval eras. By William Chaffers, . . .
Fourth Edition, revised and considerably augmented. with 3000
potters' marks and illustrations. London: Bickers & Son, . . .
CI[** inverted C].I[** inverted C].CCC.LXXIV. _Royal 8vo, half brown
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

The Printer's copy, one of two printed on thick paper, with many of the
plates in colour.


CHAFFERS, WILLIAM.--The Collector's Hand Book of Marks and Monograms on
Pottery & Porcelain . . . with nearly 3000 marks. By William Chaffers . . .
London: Bickers and Son, . . . 1874. _8vo, cloth._


CHALKLEY, THOMAS.--A Collection of the Works of Thomas Chalkley. [Part
II. Containing His Epistles, and other Writings.] Philadelphia: Printed
by B. Franklin, and D. Hall, MDCCXLIX. _8vo, two volumes, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._


CHALMERS, THOMAS.--On the Power Wisdom and Goodness of God as manifested
in the Adaptation of external Nature to the moral and intellectual
Constitution of Man by the Rev. Thomas Chalmers D.D. . . . [Second
edition]   London   William Pickering   1833. _8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

Bridgewater Treatise No. I.


CHAMBERS, ROBERT.--(I.) Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation.
Third Edition   London: John Churchill . . . MDCCCXLV. (II.)
Explanations: a Sequel to "Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation."
By the author of that work. London: John Churchill . . . MDCCCXLV.
_12mo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


CHAMPION AND OWEN.--Two Centures of Ceramic Art in Bristol being a
History of the Manufacture of "The True Porcelain" by Richard Champion
with a biography compiled from private correspondence journals and
family papers; containing unpublished letters of Edmund Burke, Richard
and William Burke the Duke of Portland, the Marquis of Rockingham and
others   With an account of the Delft, Earthenware and Enamel Glass
Works from original sources   By Hugh Owen, . . . Illustrated with one
hundred and sixty engravings   London   Bell and Daldy, . . . 1873.
_Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Champion by W. T. Davey.


CHANDOS THE HERALD.--The Black Prince. An historical poem, written in
French, by Chandos Herald; with a translation and notes by the Rev.
Henry Octavius Coxe, . . . Printed for the Roxburghe Club. London: W.
Nicol, . . . M DCCC XLII. _Royal 4to, half brown morocco, uncut edges._

Engraved title and facsimile.


CHANTRY, JOHN.--A Book of Portraicture. John Chantry, sculp. 1663. Sold
by Godfrey Richards at the signe of the Peacock in Cornhil neere the
Royall Exchange. London. _Oblong 4to, half green morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by R. W. Smith._

Twenty-one plates engraved by Chantry after the designs of Godfrey
Richards.


CHAP-BOOKS, 1744 &c--(I.) The Delightful New Academy of Complements. . . .
[cut] York: Printed and Sold by Thomas G   (II.) Anacreon's Feast. To
which are added, 1. A New Irish and Scotch Song. 2. The German Mare.
3. A New Song on Alderman Wilkes. [cut] [Colophon]   Worcester: Printed
for S. Gamidge; &c . . . [n. d.]   (III.) The Baffled Knight; Or, The
Lady's Policy. [cut] . . . Worcester: . . . S. Gamidge: &c . . . [n. d.]
. . . (IV.) The Berkshire Tragedy: or, the Whittham Miller. . . . [cut]
   York: Pirnted for John Keed, 1744. (V.) Britannia's Charter A choice
Collection of New Songs. . . . [cut] Printed for S. Gamidge, . . .
Worcester. . . . [n. d.]. (VI.) The Witty and Entertaining Exploits of
Sir Geo. Buhanan, commonly called the King's Fool. Printed by S.
Gamidge, in Worcester; &c . . . [n. d.]   (VII.) The Wandering Young
Gentlewoman; or Catskin. To which is added, The Sailor's Return   [cut]
   Ludlow: Printed by J. Turner. [n. d.] (VIII.) A Collection of New
Songs. Containing, 1. Jockey and Jenny. &c . . . Sold by S. Gamidge, in
Worcester. [n. d.] (IX.) A Choice Collection of Scotch Songs. Part the
First. . . . [cut]   Sold by S. Gamidge, in Worcester; . . . [n. d.]
(X.) Part the Fourth of a Choice Collection of Scotch Songs. . . . [cut]
   Worcester: Printed for S. Gamidge; &c--[n. d.] (XI.) A Collection of
New Songs. Containing. 1. An Ode to Echo. . . . [cut containing "Num.
VI."] Sold by S. Gamidge, . . . Worcester. [n. d.] (XII.) A Collection
of New Songs. Containing. 1. Cymon and Iphigenia. . . . [cut containing
"Num. VIII"] Sold by S. Gamidge, . . . Worcester, . . . [n. d.]
(XIII.) Cupid's Magazine. Being a Choice Collection of Songs. . . .
London: Printed for C. Sheppard, . . . [n. d.] [cut] . . . (XIV.) The
Life and Adventures of Capt. John Deane. . . . [cut] Sold by S. Gamidge,
in Worcester. [n. d.] (XV.) The Devonshire Nymph; Or, The Knight's
Happy Choice. . . . [cut] Sold by S. Gamidge, . . . Worcester. [n. d.]
(XVI.) A diverting Dialogue both Serious and Comical: That passed the
other day between a noted Shoemaker and his Wife, living in this
Neighbourhood. [cut] Een tered according to Order [n. d.] (XVII.) Fair
Maudlin; or, the Merchant's Daughter of Bristol. [cut] . . .
[Colophon] Printed for S. Gamidge, . . . Worcester. [n. d.] (XVIII.)
The Five Strange Wonders of the World: or, a New Merry Book of All
Fives. . . . Sold by S. Gamidge, in Worcester; . . . [n. d.] (XIX.)
The Glocestershire Tragedy; Being an Account of Miss Mary Smith, of
Thornbury, who Poisoned her Father, Sir John Smith, For Love of a young
Man. . . . Printed and Sold by Howard and Evans, . . . London. [n. d.]
(XX.) The Golden Bull; or, The Crafty Princess. . . . [cut] . . . [n.
p., n. d.] (XXI.) Undutiful Daughter: or the Hampshire Wonder. . . .
[cut] Printed by C. James . . . [London, n.d.]   (XXII.) A Mournful
Tragedy. Being A True Copy of Verses, shewing the unparallelled
Sufferings of the Heer Van Ussell, a Dutchman, his Lady, two Children,
and sixteen Sailors, who underwent such hardships at Sea, as
forced them to kill and eat one another. [cut] Sold by S. Gamidge, in
Worcester, [n. d.]   (XXIII.) The Overthrow of Proud Holofernes; And the
Triumph of Virtuous Queen Judith. [cut]   Worcester: Printed for S.
Gamidge . . . [n. d.]   (XXIV.) The Hull Tragedy, or Unnatural
Ingratitude. . . . Sold by S. Gamidge, . . . Worcester. . . . (XXV.)
Joaks upon Joaks, or No Joak like a true Joak. Containing, The Merry
Pranks of The Earls of Warwick and Pembroke, Lord Rochester, Lord Mohun,
&c. Sold by S. Gamidge, . . . Worcester; &c . . . [n. d.]   (XXVI.)
The Pleasant and Delightful History of Lawrence Lazy: containing His
Birth and Slothful Breeding: . . . [cut] Printed, for James Hodges, at
the Looking-Glass on London-Bridge. (XXVII.) The Liverpool Tragedy.
[n. d.] (XXVIII.) Love At the first Sight: Or, the Gay In a Flutter; . . .
London: Printed by T. Thomas, near St. Pauls. [n. d.] (XXIX.) A
Collection of Love-Letters. To which is added The History of Sylvia.
[cut] Sold by S. Gamidge, . . . Worcester. . . . [n. d.] (XXX.) The
Amusement, Being a Collection of Thirteen Love Songs. [n. d.] (XXXI.)
The Loyal Martyrs: or, Bloody Inquisitor. . . . Worcester: Printed for
S. Gamidge; . . . [n. d.] (XXXII.) The Maiden's Prize; or, Batchelor's
Puzzle. . . . Printed for S. Gamidge, . . . Worcester. [n. d.]
(XXXIII.) The Miraculous Farmer: or, No Cock like the West-Country
Cock. [cut] Ludlow: Printed by J. Turner. [n. d.] (XXXIV.) The
Nottingham Tragedy. . . . London: Prinsed by J. Johnson. [n. d.]
(XXXV.) The Oxfordshire Tragedy; or, Rosanna's Overthrow. . . .
[cut] Printed for S. Gamidge, in Worcester. . . . [n. d.] (XXXVI.) A
choice Penny-worth of Wit; . . . [n. d.] (XXXVII.) Pills to purge
Melancholy: or, England's Witty and Ingenious Jester. . . . [cut] Sold
by S. Gamidge, . . . Worcester . . . [n. d.] (XXXVIII.) Plymouth
Tragedy: or, Fair Susan's Overthrow. . . . [cut] [n. d.] (XXXIX.) The
Politick Chambermaid: or, The Merchant Outwitted. . . . [cut]   Sold by
S. Gamidge, in Worcester; . . . [n. d.] (XL.) The Somersetshire
Tragedy: or, The Unnatural Mother. Sold by S. Gamidge, in Worcester; . . .
[n. d.] (XLI.) The History and Lives Of all the most Notorious
Pirates, and their Crews. . . . [cut] Sold by S. Gamidge, in
Worcester; . . . [n. d.] _8vo, forty-one works in one volume, green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


CHAP-BOOKS, 1814-1817.--(I.) The Coalman's Courtship to the Creel-wife's
daughter. In three parts. . . . Stirling: printed and sold by M.
Randall. [n. d.] (II.) Odd History of a Scottish Thief, who imposed on
the city of London, Bristol, &c. under the title of a Lord's eldest son.
Also A Wonderful Escape from Death. [cut] [Stirling]   Printed by M.
Randall. [n. d.] (III.) The London Spy. Or the Frauds of London
described. Being a complete discourse of all the Dark Transactions In
and about that Great City. Edinburgh: Printed for the Booksellers. 1816.
(IV.) The Exploits of Wise Willie, and Witty Eppie the Ale-Wife, of
Buchaven. [cut]   Stirling: Printed and Sold by M. Randall. [n. d.] (V.)
Thrummy Cap: a tale. To which are added. Young Whip Stich, and the Gig
Demolished. [cut] Stirling: Printed and Sold by M. Randall. [n. d.]
(VI.) History of the King and the Cobler. In two parts. . . . A New
Edition enlarged. [cut]   Sold wholesale by J. Fraser & Co. . . .
Stirling. [n. d.] (VII.) The Comical Transactions of Lothian Tom. In six
parts. . . . [cut]   Paisley: Printed by J. Neilson. 1815. (VIII.) Fun
upon Fun! or, the Comical Merry Tricks of Leper the Taylor. In two
parts. . . . [cut]   Paisley: Printed by J. Neilson. 1815. (IX.) The
History of the Seven Wise Masters of Rome. . . . Falkirk: printed
by T Johnston. 1816. (X.) The History of Moll. Flanders. . . . [cut]
Paisley, printed by J. Neilson, 1815. (XI.) The History of John Cheap
the Chapman, . . . In three parts. [cut] Glasgow: Published and Sold by
R. Hutchinson & Co. . . . 1817. (XII.) The Comical History of Simple
John and his Twelve Misfortunes; . . . [cut] Glasgow: . . . R.
Hutchinson & Co. . . . 1817. (XIII.) The History of The Wicked Life and
Horrid Death of Dr. John Faustus. . . . [cut] Printed in the year 1816.
(XIV.) The Laird of Cool's Ghost. . . . [cut] Paisley: . . . J. Neilson.
1815. (XV.) The Ancient and Modern History of Buck-Haven in Fifeshire
. . . . [cut] Glasgow: . . . R. Hutchinson & Co. . . . 1817 (XVI.) The
Pleasant History of Poor Robin, the Merry Sadler of Walden. . . .
[cut] Printed in the year 1817. (XVII.) The Friar & Boy, or, the Young
Piper's Pleasant Pastime. . . . Stirling, Printed and Sold by M.
Randall. [n. d.] (XVIII.) The Merry Tales of the Wise Men of Gotham. . . .
Stirling: . . . M. Randall. [n. d.] (XIX.) Wanton Tom: or, the Merry
History of Tom Stitch The Tailor. . . . Stirling: printed by M. Randall.
[n. d.] (XX.) The Life and Transations of Mrs. Jane Shore, Concubine to
K. Edward 4th, . . . [cut] Paisley: . . . J. Neilson. 1816. (XXI.) The
Comical Sayings of Paddy from Cork, with His Coat Button'd Behind, . . .
[cut] Paisley: . . . J. Neilson, 1815. (XXII.) The Dominie Depos'd; or
some Reflections On his Intrigue with a young Lass, . . . With the
Sequel. By William Forbes, . . . To which is added, Maggy Johnston's
Elegy. [cut] Glasgow: . . . R. Hutchinson & Co. . . . [n. d.] (XXIII.)
The Merry and Diverting Exploits of George Buchanan, commonly called The
King's Fool. . . . [cut] Paisley: . . . J. Neilson. 1815. (XXIV.) The
Whole Proceedings of Jockey and Maggy: . . . Carefully corrected and
revised by the Author. Stirling: . . . M. Randall. 1814. _12mo,
twenty-four works in one volume, green levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Alfred Matthews._

Twenty-four old popular tracts, all reprinted from earlier editions at
Edinburgh, Glasgow, Stirling, Falkirk, and Paisley, from 1814 to 1817.
They all relate to Scotland and Scottish manners, with the exception of
two or three, viz., The Friar and the Boy, The London Spy, and The
History of Poor Robin. Thirty-seven curious woodcuts.

John Payne Collier's copy, with his notes on the fly-leaf.


CHAP-BOOKS, 1815-1828.--(I.) The History of the Haverel Wives, or the
Folly of Witless Women Displayed . . . [cut] Stirling: printed by
William Macnie, . . . [n. d.] (II.) Fun upon Fun: or the comical and
merry Tricks of Leper, the Taylor, . . . [cut] Stirling: printed by
William Macnie, . . . 1828. (III.) The Comical Sayings of Paddy from
Cork, . . . [cut] Paisley: printed by J. Neilson . . . [n. d.] (IV.) The
Laird of Cool's Ghost . . . [cut] Paisley: printed by J. Neilson. 1815.
(V.) The Intrepid & Daring Adventures of Sixteen British Seamen to which
is added, a cure for the toothach. [cut] Paisley: printed and published
by G. Caldwell. 1837. (VI.) The History of Moll Flanders . . . [cut]
Paisley, printed by J. Neilson, 1815. (VII.) The History of the Devil,
Ancient and Modern . . . [cut] Ayr: Printed and Sold by D. Macarter &
Co. 1817. (VIII.) Account of The Royal Visit of George the IVth to
Scotland. [cut] Kilmarnock: Printed by H. Crawford, . . . 1822. (IX.)
The Last Words of Christian Ker, . . . By Mr. Archibald Deans, . . .
Kilmarnock: printed by H. Crawford, . . . 1819. (X.) Honesty the Best
Policy: Exemplified in the Life of the English Water-man. [cut]
Kilmarnock: Printed by H. Crawford, . . . 1822. (XI.) The Comical
History of the King and the Cobler. [cut] Kilmarnock: printed by H.
Crawford, . . . [n. d.] (XII.) The History of Jack and the Giants . . .
[cut] Kilmarnock: Printed by H. Crawford, . . . 1821. (XIII.) The
History of Redmond O'Hanlon, captain of the Irish Robbers . . . [cut]
Kilmarnock: printed by H Crawford. 1820. (XIV.) The Way to Wealth; or,
Poor Richard's maxims improved, . . . Falkirk: printed for the
booksellers. [n. d.] (XV.) The Travels & Adventures of Will^{m}. Lithgow,
in Europe, Asia, & Africa, during nineteen years. [cut] Falkirk: printed
by T. Johnstone. 1819. (XVI.) The Pleasing Art of Money-catching and the
way to thrive, by Turning a Penny to Advantage: . . . Falkirk: printed
for the booksellers. [n. d.] (XVII.) A Description of North America, and
the British Settlements in Canada: . . . [cut] Falkirk: printed by T.
Johnston: 1817. (XVIII.) The Art of Courtship, or, the school of love
. . . [cut] [n. d.] (XIX.) The Comical Transactions of Lothian Tom . . .
[cut] Paisley: Printed by J. Neilson. 1815. (XX.) The witty and
entertaining Exploits of George Buchannan, who was commonly called the
King's Fool . . . Edinburgh: Printed by J. Morren, . . . [n. d.] _8vo,
twenty works in one volume, red morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Alfred Matthews._


CHAP-BOOKS. 1817-1818.--(I.) The Sleeping Beauty in the Wood, an
entertaining tale. [cut] Edinburgh; Printed and Sold by J. Morren,
Cowgate. [n. d.] (II.) Prophecies of Thomas the Rhymer, . . . containing
the wonderful fulfilment of many of his predictions; and those not yet
accomplished. Collected, Examined, and now Promulgated By Mr. Allan
Boyd, . . . With, subjoined, an account of The Battle of Bannockburn, . . .
And, Impartiality, a Turkish Tale. Sold wholesale by J. Fraser & Co.
printers, Stirling, [n. d.] (III.) A Groat's worth of Wit for a Penny:
or, the Interpretation of Dreams, Moles, &c. [cut] Edinburgh: Printed
for the Booksellers in Town and Country. [n. d.] (IV.) The Adventures of
Thrummy Cap: a tale. To which are added, The London Tailor on
horseback: and The Gig Demolish'd. [cut] Falkirk: printed & Sold by T.
Johnston, 1817. (V.) The Scots Piper's Queries, or John Falkirk's
carriches. To which is added His Comical and Witty Jokes. When in
Courtship with an old Fiddler's Widow, . . . Edinburgh, Printed by J.
Morren, [n. d.] (VI.) The Comical Transactions of Lothian Tom. In six
parts. Wherein is contained A collection of Roguish Exploits, Done by
Him, both in Scotland and England. Stirling: Printed and Sold by M.
Randall. [n. d.] (VII.) The Life & Transactions of Mrs. Jane Shore.
Concubine to King Edward IV. containing an account of Her Parentage, Wit
and Beauty, her Marriage with Mr Shore, the King,s Visits to her; her
going to Court, leaving her Husband; her great distress and misery
after the King's death, &c. [cut] Edinburgh: printed by J. Morren. [n.
d.] (VIII.) The comical history of the Collier's Wedding, at Benwell,
near New Castle upon Tyne. By Edward Chicken. . . . Edinburgh: printed
for the booksellers. 1818. (IX.) The History of the Devil, ancient and
modern, in two parts. . . . Edinburgh; Printed by J. Morren, Campbell's
close, Cowgate. [n. d.] (X.) The interesting History of the amiable Lady
Jane Gray, who Reigned only Nine Days Queen of England. [cut] Falkirk:
printed by T. Johnston. 1818. (XI.) The History of the Seven Wise
Masters, of Rome. . . . [cut] Stirling. Printed and Sold by M. Randall.
[n. d.] (XII.) The Fortunes & Misfortunes of the famous Moll Flanders.
Who was born in Newgate, . . . [cut] Edinburgh, Printed by J. Morren,
[n. d.] (XIII.) The History of the Frolicksome Courtier, and the
Jovial Tinker. [cut] Stirling: Printed and Sold by C. Randall. [n. d.]
(XIV.) The witty and entertaining Exploits of George Buchannan, who was
commonly called the King's Fool. . . . Edinburgh: Printed and Sold by J.
Morren, . . . [n. d.] (XV.) The Merry Tales, of the Wise Men of Gotham
. . . . [cut] Stirling: Printed by M. Randall. [n. d.] (XVI.) The History
of the famous Valentine and Orson [cut] . . . Edinburgh: Printed for
the Company of Flying Stationers. (XVII.) Fun upon Fun. Or t h Comical
and Merry Tricks of Leper the Taylor. In two parts. [cut] Edinburgh;
Printed and Sold by J. Morren, . . . [n. d.] (XVIII.) A wonderful
account of Mr. George Spearing, A Lieutenant in the Navy, who fell into
a Coal Pit in Northwoodside, near Glasgow; . . . Also, The Surprising
manner of his Deliverance, . . . To which is added, A Hymn of Praise for
his Deliverance. Published by himself, for the information of his
Friends and the Public. Kilmarnock: Printed for the Booksellers. [n. d.]
(XIX.) The Comical Adventures of the late comedian, Mr James Spiller, At
Epsom, in England. A true humorous tale. To which is added, the pleasant
story of Obadiah Mousetrap. . . . Edinburgh: Printed and Sold by J.
Morren, . . . [n. d.] (XX.) The Comical Sayings of Pady from Cork. With
his coat button'd behind. . . . To which is added his creed for all
Romish believers. [cut] Edinburgh: Printed, by J. Morren, . . . [n. d.]
(XXI.) The History of Whittington and his cat. [cut] Edinburgh: Printed
for the Booksellers in Town and Country. (XXII.) The History of
Fortunatus. To which are added, the lives and adventures of Ampedo, and
Andolocia, His two Sons. [cut] Edinburgh: Printed for the Booksellers in
Town and Country [n. d.] (XXIII.) A true tale of Robin Hood; setting
forth the life and death Of that Renowned Out-law Robert, Earl of
Huntington, vulgarly called Robin Hood. . . . Carefully collected out of
the truest Writers of our English chronicles; . . . By Martin
Parker, Gent. [cut] Haddington: Printed by G. Miller: . . . [n. d.]
_12mo, twenty-three works in one volume, red morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Matthews._

Presentation copy to Joseph Haslewood, September, 1823.


CHAP-BOOKS, 1826, &c--(I.) The Haughs of Crumdel; Giving a full account
of that Memorable Battle fought by the Great Montrose and the Clans,
against Oliver Cromwell; To which are added, The Broom of Cowdenknowes,
The Highland Plaid. [cut] Stirling: Printed and Sold, Wholesale and
Retail, by W. Macnie, . . . [n. d.] (II.) The Tragedy of Sir James the
Rose. [cut] Stirling: Printed and Sold, . . . by W. Macnie, . . . [n.
d.] (III.) The Blackamoor of the Wood; being a Tragical end of a gallant
Lord and virtuous Lady; . . . [cut] Stirling: Printed by W. Macnie. [n.
d.] (IV.) The Woodman; To which are added, The Galley Slave, I'm well
sair'd wi' spunk, Jock of Hazeldean, William's Farewell, Jenny the Maid
of the Moor, Oh! Lady Fair. [cut] Stirling: Printed and Sold, . . . By
W. Macnie, . . . [n. d.] (V.) Hills o' Gallowa; To which are added, Last
May a braw wooer, Green grow the rashes, O, Sweet the rose blaws. [cut]
Stirling: Printed by W. Macnie. 1826. (VI.) Soldier's Dream; To which
are added, Hap me with thy Petticoat, At the Dead of the Night, Bonny
Mally Stewart, Lochaber no More, Down the Burn Davie. [cut] Stirling:
Printed and Sold, . . . by W. Macnie, . . . [n. d.] (VII.) Bundle and
Go; . . . [cut] Stirling: . . . W. Macnie, . . . [n. d.] (VIII.) Sair
sair was my heart; . . . [cut] Stirling: . . . W. Macnie. 1826. (IX.)
The bonny lass of Banaphie; To which is added, The Banks of Clyde. [cut]
Stirling   Printed by W. Macnie. 1826. (X.) The Duke of Gordon's
Daughters; To which is added, The Challenge. [cut] Stirling: . . . W.
Macnie, . . . [n. d.] (XI.) Allan Tine o'Harrow; . . . [cut] Stirling:
. . . W. Macnie, . . . [n. d.] (XII.) Welcome Charlie o'er the Main; To
which are added, The day Returns, &c . . . [cut] Stirling: Printed and
Sold, . . . by W. Macnie, . . . 1826. (XIII.) Captain Wedderburn's
Courtship. . . . [cut] Stirling: . . . W. Macnie, . . . [n. d.] (XIV.)
The Same as XIII. (XV.) The Bonny Lassie's Plaidy awa, Flora's Lament
for Charlie, . . . [cut] Stirling: . . . W. Macnie, . . . [n. d.] (XVI.)
Andrew Lammie, or, Mill of Tiftie's Annie. [cut] Stirling: Printed and
Sold, . . . by W. Macnie, . . . [n. d.] (XVII.) A Garland of New Songs.
Muirland Willie . . . [cut] Printed by J. Marshall, . . . [n. d.]
(XVIII.) No. 12. Excellent New Songs, viz. The Soldier's Return, &c . . .
[cut] Alnwick: Printed and Sold by W. Davison. . . . [n. d.] _12mo,
eighteen works in one volume, half green morocco, uncut edges._


CHAP-BOOKS.--The Haughs of Crumdel &c The Tragedy of Sir James the Rose.
The Blackamoor of the Wood   The Woodman &c   Hills o' Gallowa; &c
Soldier's Dream &c   Bundle and Go; &c   Sair, sair was my heart   The
bonny lass of Banaphie &c   The Duke of Gordon's Daughters &c   Allan
Tine O'Harrow &c   Welcome Charlie o'er the Main &c   and five others
Stirling . . . W. Macnie   1826. _12mo, seventeen pieces in one volume,
half bound, uncut edges._


CHAP-BOOKS, AMERICAN.--(I.) An Exact Account of the Trial and Execution
of Captain Jeane Who was hang'd in Chains on the 13th of last Month,
for the most vile and unheard of cruel Murder of Richard Peyne, his
Cabbin-boy, in his Passage homewards from South Carolina, in which is
repeated his particular Barbarities   all which being so inhuman that
after the Judge had pronounced Sentence of Death against him, he said,
A more cruel and horrible Crime he never heard of, and and hoped such
another would never come before him again. Licenced and entered
according to order   (II.) The Great and Wonderful News From America, On
the arrival of Captain Williams, Commander of the Ship, called the
Dolphin, who was Seven Weeks and three Days in their Passage from
Hallifax, in North America, being bound for Bristol, but by contrary
Winds was forced to put in at Parkgate: with an account how he brought
with him the most Wonderful Jew together with his most Surprizing
Examination before four Reverend Divines, to which is added, a Hymn
which he is heard to sing when he is by himself. [cut] (III.) The
Havannah's Garland, Consisting of three excellent New Songs. I. On
the Siege and Taking of Havannah. II. O to be married if this the Way.
III. The Ale-Wife's Supplication. [cut] Licensed and entered according
to order. (IV.) The Poor Unhappy Transported Felon's Sorrowful Account
of His Fourteen Years Transportation at Virginia, in America. In six
parts. Being A remarkable and succinct History of the Life of James
Revel, the unhappy Sufferer. . . . Licensed and enterter'd according
to Order. _12mo, four volumes, citron levant morocco, Janseniste, uncut
edges, in a blue levant morocco case, by Riviere._


CHARLES I.--A Catalogue and Description of King Charles the First's
capital Collection of

  pictures,   || bronzes,
  limnings,   || medals, and
  statues,    || Other curiosities;

Now first published from an Original Manuscript in the Ashmolean
Musaeum at Oxford. The whole transcribed and prepared for the Press,
and a great part of it printed, by the late ingenious Mr. Vertue, and
now finished from his Papers. London, Printed for W. Bathoe, . . .
M DCC LVII. _4to, red straight-grain morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Riviere._


CHARLEY CHALK; or, the career of an artist: being Sketches from Real
Life; comprising a narrative of his extraordinary adventures in Great
Britain and Ireland, France and Greece. With illustrations by Jacob
Parallel. London: G. Berger, . . . [n. d.]. _8vo, citron levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Frontispiece, vignette title-page, and eighteen plates.


CHATELAIN, HELI, _editor_.--Folk-tales of Angola   Fifty tales, with
Ki-mbundu text literal English translation introduction, and notes
collected and edited by Heli Chatelain . . . Boston and New York
Published for The American Folk-Lore Society by Houghton, Mifflin and
Company . . . 1894. _8vo, cloth, gilt top._


CHATELAIN, MADAME DE.--The Silver Swan. A Fairy Tale. By Madame de
Chatelain   London: Grant and Griffith . . . M.DCCC.XLVII. _Square post
8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, sextuple fillet inside, silk
linings, gilt edges, and the original covers bound in, by Riviere._

Four coloured plates by John Leech.


CHATTERTON, THOMAS.--The Works of Thomas Chatterton. . . . containing
his Life, by G. Gregory D.D., and Miscellaneous Poems. London: printed
by Biggs and Cottle . . . for T. N. Longman and O. Rees &c. 1803. _8vo,
three volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Edited by Southey and Cottle, and published for the benefit of Miss
Newton, Chatterton's niece. Facsimiles and other plates, and (inserted)
a portrait of Chatterton, proof on India paper.


CHATTERTON, THOMAS.--The Poetical Works of Thomas Chatterton with
Notices of his Life, history of the Rowley controversy, a selection of
his letters, and notes critical and explanatory. . . . Cambridge:
printed for W. P. Grant. M DCCC XLII. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, half
maroon morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy. Engraved title-pages and three facsimiles.


CHATTO, WILLIAM ANDREW.--The Angler's Souvenir, by P. Fisher, Esq,
[William Andrew Chatto]   Assisted by several eminent Piscatory
Characters, with Illustrations by Beckwith & Topham. London, Charles
Tilt . . . 1835. _Small 8vo, green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Matthews._

Engraved title, dedication, and thirty-one steel plates on India paper.
The text is printed within appropriate woodcut borders.


CHATTO, WILLIAM ANDREW.--The Angler's Souvenir. 1835. _Small 8vo,
original cloth, uncut edges._

Another copy, with the plates on India paper.


CHATTO, WILLIAM ANDREW.--The Angler's Souvenir by P. Fisher Esq. London,
Henry G. Bohn, . . . 1845. _Small 8vo, green calf, gilt back and edges._

The illustrations to this book are in proof state, and in addition are
inserted Gosden's facsimile-title to the first edition of Walton's
Angler, the frontispieces (proofs) to Pickering's miniature edition of
Walton, portraits of Walton and Cotton from the Pickering edition of
1836, and other plates of Fish, etc., from various editions of the
Complete Angler, with the Milkmaid's Song and other extracts in
manuscript, ornamented, fifty-four plates in all.


CHATTO, WILLIAM ANDREW.--Scenes and Recollections of Fly-Fishing, in
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmoreland. By Stephen Oliver, the
Younger. London: Chapman and Hall . . . 1834. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

Printed by Whittingham, with numerous woodcut illustrations.


CHATTO, WILLIAM ANDREW.--See Jackson and Chatto.


CHAVES, A.--The Cares of Love, or, a Night's Adventure. a Comedy. As it
is now Acted at the Theatre-Royal in Little Lincolns-Inn Fields, By Her
Majesties Servants. [One line from Ovid]   London: Printed for W. Davis
. . . and J. Chantry, . . . 1705. Price 1s. 6d. _4to, green
straight-grain morocco, gilt back, gilt and blind-tooled side borders,
gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A-H3 in fours, final leaf of Advertisement, H4, title on
A1. Dedication to Sir William Read, the mountebank oculist, Prologue by
Booth, who took the part of Florencio.


CHESTERFIELD, EARL OF.--Miscellaneous Works of the late Philip Dormer
Stanhope, Earl of Chesterfield: consisting of Letters to his Friends,
never before printed, and various other articles. To which are prefixed
Memoirs of his Life, tending to illustrate the civil, literary and
political History of his Time. By M. Maty . . . The Second Edition . . .
with an Appendix, containing Sixteen Characters of Great Personages. &c
London: printed for Edward and Charles Dilly . . . MDCCLXXIX. _8vo, four
volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Pratt._

Portraits engraved by Bartolozzi, Sherwin, etc.


CHESTERFIELD, EARL OF.--Letters written by the Earl of Chesterfield to
his Son. [portrait] London: printed for Thomas Tegg . . . [at the
Chiswick Press] 1827. _12mo, three volumes, green morocco, gilt back,
side panels, gilt edges._

With several other pieces, on various subjects, published by Mrs.
Eugenia Stanhope from the originals.


CHESTERFIELD, EARL OF.--The Letters [and Works] of Philip Dormer
Stanhope, Earl of Chesterfield; including numerous letters now first
published from the original manuscripts. Edited, with Notes, by Lord
Mahon . . . London: Richard Bentley . . . 1845-'53. _8vo, five volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

Five steel portraits.


CHESTERFIELD TRAVESTIE; or, School for Modern Manners. Embellished with
ten caricatures, engraved by Woodward from original Drawings by
Rowlandson . . . London: Printed by T. Plummer . . . for Thomas Tegg . . .
1808. _Post 8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

The ten plates by Rowlandson are coloured, and the original paper covers
are preserved.


CHIENE, JOHN.--Lectures on Surgical Anatomy by John Chiene, M. D. &c . . .
illustrated by 31 plates (78 figures) drawn on stone [and tinted or
coloured] by Charles Berjeau, from original dissections   Edinburgh
David Douglas   1878 . . . _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


CHILD, FRANCIS JAMES.--See Lowell, J. R.


CHIPPENDALE, THOMAS.--The Gentleman and Cabinet-Maker's Director. Being
a large collection of the most Elegant and Useful Designs of Household
Furniture in the Gothic, Chinese and Modern Taste . . . to which is
prefixed, a short explanation of the Five Orders of Architecture, and
Rules of Perspective; with Proper Directions for executing the most
difficult Pieces, the Mouldings being exhibited at large, and the
Dimensions of each Design specified: the whole comprehended in One
hundred and sixty copper-plates, neatly engraved . . . By Thomas
Chippendale . . . The second edition. London, printed by J. Haberkorn . . .
for the Author . . . MDCCLV. _Royal folio, mottled calf, gilt back
and side panels, gilt edges, by Riviere._


CHRISTIE, JAMES.--An Inquiry into the Early History of Greek Sculpture.
By the late James Christie, . . . London: printed by William Clowes, . . .
MDCCCXXXIII. _4to, boards._

India proof portrait.


CHRISTIE, RICHARD COPLEY.--Etienne Dolet the Martyr of the Renaissance a
biography by Richard Copley Christie, . . . [portrait] London
Macmillan and Co. 1880 . . . _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Six illustrations.


CHRISTIE, RICHARD COPLEY.--Etienne Dolet The Martyr of the Renaissance
1508-1546 a biography by Richard Copley Christie . . . New [second]
edition, revised and corrected [wood cut portrait] London   Macmillan
and Co., . . . 1899 . . . _Square 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


CHRISTMAS with the Poets: a Collection of Songs, Carols, and Descriptive
Verses, relating to the Festival of Christmas, from the Anglo-Norman
period to the present time. Embellished with fifty tinted illustrations
by Birket Foster, and with initial letters and other ornaments   London:
David Bogue . . . MDCCCLI. _Royal 8vo, green morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by Matthews._

Printed within gold borders, the ornamental initials also in gold.


CHURCHILL, CHARLES.--(I.) Poems. By C. Churchill. Containing The
Rosciad. The Apology. Night. The Prophecy of Famine. An Epistle to
William Hogarth. And The Ghost, in four books. London: printed for the
author, by Dryden Leach . . . MDCCLXIII. (II.) Poems. By C. Churchill.
Containing The Conference. The Author. The Duellist. Gotham, in three
books. The Candidate. The Farewell. The Times. Independence. And
Fragment of Journey. Volume II. London: Printed for John Churchill . . .
and W. Flexney . . . MDCCLXV. _4to, two volumes, old red morocco, gilt
back, side borders, gilt edges._

First edition. Volume I is a presentation copy from the author.


CHURCHILL, CHARLES.--The Works of C. Churchill. . . . [vignette by I.
Taylor] The fifth edition. London: Printed for John Churchill (Executor
to the late C. Churchill.); and W. Flexney, . . . M DCC LXX IV. _Post
8vo, four volumes, calf, gilt back, citron edges._

The same vignette on the four title-pages, and one plate in Volume I.


CHURCHILL, CHARLES.--The Poetical Works of Charles Churchill, with
copious notes and a Life of the Author by W. Tooke [portrait] London
William Pickering   1844. _Foolscap 8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._


CIBBER, THEOPHILUS.--The Lives of the Poets of Great Britain and Ireland
to the time of Dean Swift. Compiled from ample Materials scattered in a
Variety of Books, and especially from the MS. Notes of the late
ingenious M^{r} Coxeter and others, collected for this Design, by M^{r}
Cibber. London: Printed for R. Griffiths . . . MDCCLIII. _12mo, five
volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

The title-pages to Volumes IV and V read, after "Ireland," "By M^{r}
Cibber and other Hands."

These Lives were chiefly written by a Scotchman named Shiels, and
embrace 213 names, from the period of Chaucer to the middle of the
eighteenth century.


CICERO, MARCUS TULLIUS.--M. T. Cicero's Cato Major, or his Discourse of
Old-Age: With Explanatory Notes. Philadelphia: Printed and Sold by B.
Franklin, MDCCXLIV. _Small 4to, green levant morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


CLARK, EDWARD L.--Daleth or the Homestead of the Nations Egypt
illustrated By Edward L. Clark   Boston   Ticknor and Fields   1864.
_8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Eleven coloured plates and numerous illustrations in the text.


CLARK, JOHN WILLIS.--The Care of Books   An Essay on the Development of
Libraries and their Fittings, from the earliest times to the end of the
Eighteenth Century   By John Willis Clark, . . . [156 illustrations]
Cambridge at the University Press   1901. _Imperial 8vo, buckram, gilt
top, uncut edges._


CLARKE, WILLIAM.--Repertorium Bibliographicum; or some Account of the
Most Celebrated British Libraries . . . London: William Clarke, . . .
MDCCCXIX. _Royal 8vo, red morocco, gilt edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with India proof impressions of the
plates. Bound at the end: "A Dialogue in the Shades, and a Ballad
entitled Rare Doings at Roxburghe-Hall. London 1821."

Also "A Diary of Roger Payne, with an engraved Sketch of a Monument to
be erected to his Memory by the Bibliomaniacal Club, 1821," and a
portrait (inserted).


CLAUDIN, ANTOINE.--The First Paris Press   an account of the books
printed for G. Fichet and J. Heynlin in the Sorbonne 1470-1472   By A.
Claudin   London   printed for the Bibliographical Society at the
Chiswick Press   February 1898 for 1897. _4to, original paper wrappers,
uncut edges._

Frontispiece by J. Hyatt after a miniature, and ten facsimiles.

No. VI of Illustrated Monographs issued by the Bibliographical Society.


CLAYTON, ELLEN CREATHORNE.--Queens of Song: being memoirs of some of the
most celebrated female vocalists who have appeared on the lyric stage,
from the earliest days of opera to the present time. To which is added a
chronological list of all the operas that have been performed in Europe.
By Ellen Creathorne Clayton. . . . With six portraits. London: Smith,
Elder and Co., . . . M. DCCC. LX III. _8vo, two volumes, half red levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


CLAYTON, ELLEN CREATHORNE.--English Female Artists. By Ellen C. Clayton,
. . . London: Tinsley Brothers, . . . 1876. . . . _8vo, two volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._


CLINTON, GEORGE.--Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Lord Byron. By
George Clinton, . . . London: James Robins and Co. . . . M DCCC XXVII.
_8vo, half calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait and thirty-four woodcuts by G. Bonner, and a facsimile.


CLIO AND EUTERPE.--(I.) Clio and Euterpe or British Harmony   A
Collection of Celebrated Songs and Cantatas   By the most approv'd
Masters Curiously Engrav'd With the Thorough Bass for the Harpsicord
and Transposition for the German Flute   Embelish'd with Designs
adapted to each Song. In two volumes   Volume the first containing near
two Hundred Airs. London. Sold by the Proprietor Henry Roberts Engraver
& Printseller . . . [n.d.] (II.) Clio and Euterpe . . . In two volumes
Volume the second containing near two Hundred Airs   London   Sold by
the Proprietor Henry Roberts . . . M DCC LIX   III. Clio and Euterpe . . .
In III Volumes   Volume the Third containing near two Hundred Airs
London   Sold by the Proprietor Henry Robert . . . M DCC LXII. _8vo,
three volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

These volumes are engraved throughout, and have the same frontispiece,
the one in Volume I being in an earlier state than the other two. Each
has three pages of Contents, the third containing at the end a vignette
by T. Bonnor. Volumes I and II have 200 pages of musical score and
words, each page headed by a vignette. Volume III has 200 pages of text,
but only 105 vignettes.


COBBOLD, RICHARD.--The History of Margaret Catchpole, a Suffolk girl.
With [8] illustrations [by J. Harris after the author]   London: Henry
Colburn, . . . 1845. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, figured red and blue
silk, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


COBBOLD, RICHARD.--Mary Anne Wellington, the Soldier's Daughter, Wife,
and Widow. By the Rev. Richard Cobbold . . . London: Henry Colburn, . . .
1846. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, figured silk, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

Eight plates from the author's designs.


COCKTON, HENRY.--The Life and Adventures of Valentine Vox, the
Ventriloquist. By Henry Cockton. . . . London: Robert Tyas, . . .
MDCCCXL. _8vo, calf, gilt back, side corners, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Tout._

First edition: with sixty etchings by T. Onwhyn.


COLDEN, CADWALLADER.--The History of the Five Indian Nations Depending
on the Province of New-York In America. Printed and Sold by William
Bradford in New York, 1727. _Small 8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back
and sides, gilt edges, by Bedford._


COLERIDGE, HARTLEY.--Essays and Marginalia. By Hartley Coleridge. Edited
by his brother [Derwent Coleridge]   London: Edward Moxon . . . 1851.
_Foolscap 8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, back panels in gilt and
blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

Portrait.


COLERIDGE, HARTLEY.--Poems by Hartley Coleridge. With a Memoir of his
Life by his Brother . . . [Derwent Coleridge]   Second Edition   London:
Edward Moxon . . . 1851. _Foolscap 8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco,
back panels, gilt and blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

Portrait of the author in his tenth year by W. Holl after Sir David
Wilkie.


COLERIDGE, HARTLEY.--Lives of Northern Worthies. By Hartley Coleridge.
Edited by his Brother. A new edition, with the Observations of the
Author, and the marginal observations of S. T. Coleridge   London:
Edward Moxon . . . 1852. _Foolscap 8vo, three volumes, red levant
morocco, back panels in gilt and blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Champs._


COLERIDGE, HENRY NELSON.--Introductions to the Study of the Greek
Classic Poets. . . . By Henry Nelson Coleridge . . . Second edition.
[map]   London: John Murray . . . MDCCCXXXIV. _Foolscap 8vo, boards,
uncut edges._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--The Fall of Robespierre. an historic drama.
By S. T. Coleridge, of Jesus College, Cambridge. Cambridge: printed by
Benjamin Flower, for W. H. Lunn, and J. and J. Merrill; and Sold by J.
March, Norwich. 1794. [Price one shilling.] _8vo, Spanish calf, gilt
back, side borders, gilt edges, by Riviere._

First edition. A1-A2, B-E5 in fours, final leaf of advertisement, E6,
title on A1. Dedication to H. Martin, dated Jesus College, September 22,
1794.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Osorio, a Tragedy. 1797. _4to, half green
levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Pratt._

The original manuscript of "Remorse," written by Coleridge at Sheridan's
request. It was sent to Drury Lane Theatre in October, 1797, but was not
accepted, and remained there until the fire of 1809, when it was one of
the few objects saved.

Rewritten under the title "Remorse," the play ran for twenty nights.

The manuscript covers the rectos of one hundred and four leaves, between
each two of which are one or more blank leaves for annotations and
portions of the printed drama.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Osorio: a Tragedy as originally written in
1797 by Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Now first printed . . . London: John
Pearson . . . 1873. _Post 8vo, red levant morocco, back panels in gilt
and blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Remorse. A Tragedy, in five acts. By S. T.
Coleridge . . . London: printed for W. Pople, . . . 1813. Price Three
Shillings. _8vo, half calf, uncut edges._

First edition. Two leaves and A-K in fours. Prologue in verse by Charles
Lamb.

This copy is interleaved throughout, and contains many corrections and
notes in the handwriting of Coleridge. The author has also written on
the title-page "(A corrected Copy)   M^{r} Arnold from his greatly obliged
Friend, S. T. Coleridge. 'Piu vorrei: piu non posso.'"


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Christabel: Kubla Khan, a vision; The Pains
of Sleep. By S. T. Coleridge, Esq. London: printed for John Murray, . . .
by William Bulmer and Co. . . . 1816. _8vo, citron levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Large paper copy of the first edition.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Sibylline Leaves: a Collection of Poems. By
S. T. Coleridge. London: Rest Fenner . . . 1817. _8vo, red levant
morocco, back panels in gilt and blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Champs._

First edition.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Zapolya: a Christmas tale, in two parts: The
Prelude entitled "The Usurper's Fortune;" and The Sequel entitled "The
Usurper's Fate." By S. T. Coleridge, Esq. London: printed for Rest
Fenner, . . . 1817. _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, with
the original covers bound in, by Riviere._

First edition. W. Motherwell's copy, with his autograph.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Biographia Literaria; or Biographical
Sketches of my literary life and opinions. By S. T. Coleridge, Esq. . . .
London: Rest Fenner, . . . 1817. _8vo, two volumes, red levant
morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Large paper copy of the first edition.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Biographia Literaria; or Biographical
Sketches of my Literary Life and Opinions by Samuel Taylor Coleridge.
Second edition prepared for publication in part by the late Henry Nelson
Coleridge, completed and published by his Widow. London: William
Pickering   1847. _Foolscap 8vo, three volumes, red levant morocco, back
panels in gilt and blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

Fourteen portraits, etc., inserted.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Aids to Reflection in the formation of a
manly character on the several grounds of prudence, morality, and
religion: illustrated by select passages from our elder divines,
especially from Archbishop Leighton. By S. T. Coleridge. . . . London:
printed for Taylor and Hessey, . . . 1825. _Crown 8vo, brown levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Two final leaves of advertisement.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Aids to Reflection by Samuel Taylor
Coleridge. Edited by Henry Nelson Coleridge   [Sixth edition, enlarged]
   London   William Pickering   1848. _Foolscap 8vo, two volumes, red
levant morocco, gilt back and blue mosaic in panels, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Champs._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--The Poetical Works of S. T. Coleridge,
including the Dramas of Wallenstein, Remorse, and Zapolya. London:
William Pickering. MDCCCXXVIII. _8vo, three volumes, red morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Hayday._

No. 5 of twelve copies printed on large paper, with autograph
attestation of William Pickering.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--The Poetical and Dramatic Works of S. T.
Coleridge, London: William Pickering, 1847. _Foolscap 8vo, three
volumes, red levant morocco, back panels in gilt and blue mosaic, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Champs._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--The Poetical and Dramatic Works of Samuel
Taylor Coleridge founded on the author's latest edition of 1834 with
many additional pieces now first included and with a collection of
various readings. London   Basil Montagu Pickering . . . 1877. _8vo,
four volumes, boards, uncut edges._

No. 16 of twenty-four large paper copies printed on Whatman paper.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--The Poetical Works of Samuel Taylor Coleridge
edited with a biographical introduction by James Dykes Campbell London
Macmillan and Co. . . . 1893 . . . _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait after Peter Vandyke.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--The Poetry of Samuel Taylor Coleridge edited
by Richard Garnett, . . . London Lawrence and Bullen, . . . 1898. _Post
8vo, half vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait after a drawing by C. R. Leslie.

No. 60 of one hundred copies printed on large paper.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--The Literary Remains of Samuel Taylor
Coleridge. Collected and edited by Henry Nelson Coleridge London,
William Pickering 1836-'8-'9. _8vo, four volumes, red levant morocco,
back panels in gilt and blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Letters, Conversations and Recollections of
S. T. Coleridge. London: Edward Moxon, . . . 1836. _8vo, two volumes,
red levant morocco, back panels in gilt and blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Champs._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--The Friend: a series of Essays to aid in the
formation of fixed principles in Politics, Morals, and Religion, with
Literary Amusements interspersed: By Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Third
Edition: with the author's last Corrections, and an Appendix, and with a
synoptical Table of the contents of the work. By Henry Nelson Coleridge
. . . London: William Pickering 1837. _Foolscap 8vo, three volumes, red
levant morocco, back panels in gilt and blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Champs._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--(I.) On the Constitution of the Church and
State according to the idea of each. (II.) Lay Sermons. I The
Statesman's Manual   II "Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters." By
Samuel Taylor Coleridge, edited from the author's corrected copies with
Notes by Henry Nelson Coleridge   London   William Pickering   1839.
_Foolscap 8vo, red levant morocco, back panels in gilt and blue mosaic,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Confessions of an Inquiring Spirit and Some
Miscellaneous Pieces by Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Edited from the
author's MS. by Henry Nelson Coleridge   London. William Pickering
1849. _Foolscap 8vo, red levant morocco, back panels in gilt and blue
mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Notes and Lectures upon Shakespeare and Some
of the Old Poets and Dramatists, with other Literary Remains of S. T.
Coleridge. Edited by Mrs. H. N. Coleridge. London: William Pickering,
1849. _Foolscap 8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, back panels in
gilt and blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Essays on his Own Times forming a Second
Series of The Friend. By Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Edited by his
Daughter. London: William Pickering   1850. _Foolscap 8vo, three
volumes, red levant morocco, back panels in gilt and blue mosaic, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Champs._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Specimens of the Table Talk of the late
Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Third Edition London: John Murray . . . 1851.
_Foolscap 8vo, red levant morocco, back in gilt and blue mosaic, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Champs._

Portrait by Finden after Phillips.


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Notes on English Divines. By Samuel Taylor
Coleridge. Edited by the Rev. Derwent Coleridge   London: Edward Moxon
. . . 1853. _Foolscap 8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, back panels in
gilt and blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--Notes, Theological, Political, and
Miscellaneous. By Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Edited by the Rev. Derwent
Coleridge   London: Edward Moxon . . . 1853. _Foolscap 8vo, red levant
morocco, back panels in gilt and blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Champs._


COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.--See Gillman, James. (Life.) Wordsworth and
Coleridge.


COLERIDGE, SARA.--Phantasmion London: William Pickering   1837. _Post
8vo, red levant morocco, back panels in gilt and blue mosaic, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Champs._


"COLLET, STEPHEN."--See Byerley, Thomas.


COLLIER, JANE.--An Essay on the Art of ingeniously Tormenting; with
proper rules for The Exercise of that Pleasant Art.

                Humbly addressed,
  In the First Part,    |  In the Second Part,
  To the { Master       |  To the { Wife
         { Husband, &c. |         { Friend, &c.

With some General Instructions for Plaguing all your Acquaintance.
[Line from Shakespeare]   London: Printed for A. Millar, . . . M. DCC.
LIII. _8vo, blue levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Large paper copy of the first edition, with frontispiece by Hogarth.


COLLIER, JOHN PAYNE.--The Poetical Decameron, or ten conversations on
English Poets and Poetry, particularly of the Reigns of Elizabeth and
James I. By J. Payne Collier . . . Printed for Archibald Constable and
Co. Edinburgh; . . . 1820. _8vo, two volumes, red morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Stikeman._


COLLIER, JOHN PAYNE.--Lives of the Original Actors in Shakespeare's
Plays. By J. Payne Collier. [London] Printed for the Shakespeare
Society. 1853. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

The second title, "Memoirs of the Principal Actors in the Plays of
Shakespeare," is dated 1846.


COLLIER, JOHN PAYNE.--A Bibliographical and Critical Account of the
Rarest Books in the English Language, alphabetically arranged, which
during the last fifty years have come under the observation of J. Payne
Collier. F.S.A. New York, David G. Francis . . . 1866. _8vo, four
volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._

Large paper copy. Collier's last literary labour, and one of the two
copies printed on drawing-paper, at the Riverside Press. Seven autograph
letters of the author are inserted.


COLLIER, JOHN PAYNE.--A Bibliographical and Critical Account of the
Rarest Books in the English Language 1866. _8vo, two volumes, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

One of five copies printed on India paper.


COLLIER, JOHN PAYNE.--Trilogy. Conversations between three friends on
the emendations of Shakespeare's text contained in Mr. Collier's
corrected folio, 1632, and employed by recent editors of the poet's
works. Printed for Private Circulation only. Part I.--Comedies. [Part
II.--Histories. Part III.--Tragedies.]   London: T. Richards, 37, Great
Queen Street. [1874]   _4to, three parts in one volume, red levant
morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original covers
bound in, by The Club Bindery._


COLLIER, JOHN PAYNE.--The History of English Dramatic Poetry to the time
of Shakespeare: and Annals of the Stage to the Restoration. By J. Payne
Collier, Esq., F.S.A. A new edition. [woodcut] . . . London: George Bell
& Sons, . . . 1879. _4to, three volumes, half brown morocco, uncut
edges._


COLLIER, JOHN PAYNE.--See Cunningham, Planche, and Collier.

Wheatley, Henry B.


COLLINS, WILLIAM.--Odes on several Descriptive and Allegoric Subjects.
By William Collins . . . London: Printed for A. Miller, . . .
M.DCC.XLVII. _8vo, red morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

The author destroyed most of this edition.


COLLINS, WILLIAM.--The Poetical Works of Mr. William Collins. With
Memoirs of the Author; and Observations on His Genius and Writings. By
J. Langhorne . . . London: Printed for T. Becket and P. A. Dehondt, . . .
MDCCLXV. _Post 8vo, old half calf._

Presentation copy "To Jean Lorimer, a small but sincere mark of
friendship from Rob^{t} Burns. The autograph of Jane Lorimer with the date
1794 follows this inscription. Other lines in the autograph of the
Scotch poet occupy the front fly-leaf, as well as an "Ode to Fancy"
facing the title.


COLLINS, WILLIAM.--The Poetical Works of William Collins, enriched with
elegant engravings. To which is prefixed a life of the author, by Dr.
Johnson. Second edition. London: printed by T. Bensley . . . 1800.
_Crown 8vo, half red levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges._

Twenty illustrations by Harding and Gardiner.


COLLINS, WILLIAM.--The Poetical Works of William Collins; with the life
of the author by Dr Johnson; observations on his writings by Dr
Langhorne; and biographical and critical notes, by the Rev. Alexander
Dyce . . . London, William Pickering . . . MDCCC.XXVII. _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


COLLINS, WILLIAM.--Poetical Works. 1827. _8vo, citron levant morocco,
back panels and side corners richly decorated, and inlaid in green and
red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Another copy. No. 3 of nine copies printed on large and tinted paper.
Illustrated by the insertion of forty plates, for the most part proofs
on India paper, and many before letters, including engravings by
Bartolozzi, the Westall illustrations, etc., etc.


COLLINS, WILLIAM.--The Poetical Works of William Collins [with a Memoir
by Sir Harris Nicolas, and a portrait of Collins.]   London   William
Pickering   1830. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


COLLINS, WILLIAM WILKIE.--Memoirs of the Life of William Collins, Esq.,
R.A. with selections from his journals and correspondence. By his son W.
Wilkie Collins. London: Longman, . . . MDCCCXLVIII. _12mo, two volumes,
original cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of the artist and frontispiece-titles.


COLLINS, WILLIAM WILKIE.--The Woman in White. By Wilkie Collins. London:
Sampson Low, Son, & Co . . . 1860. _12mo, three volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


COLLINS, WILLIAM WILKIE.--Armadale. By Wilkie Collins. With twenty
illustrations by George H. Thomas. . . . London: Smith, Elder and Co.,
. . . 1866. . . . _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


COLLINS, WILLIAM WILKIE.--Poor Miss Finch. a Novel. By Wilkie Collins . . .
London: Richard Bentley and Son. 1872. _Crown 8vo, three volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


COLMAN, GEORGE.--The Dramatick Works of George Colman . . . London,
Printed for T. Becket, . . . MDCCLXXVII. _8vo, four volumes, sprinkled
calf, gilt back, citron edges, by Bedford._


COLMAN, GEORGE, THE YOUNGER.--Broad Grins; by George Colman, the
younger; comprising, with new additional Tales in Verse, those formerly
published under the title of "My Night-gown and Slippers" . . . The
Sixth edition. London: . . . T. Cadell and W. Davies . . . 1815. _Post
8vo, maroon levant morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Alfred Matthews._

Steel portrait of the author (inserted) and numerous woodcut
illustrations.


COLONIAL SOCIETY.--The Colonial Society of America. Instituted New York
1881   [Philadelphia, Wm. F. Fell & Co., 1881]. _4to, half red
straight-grain morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by R. Rutter._

Printed on vellum, with trial pages and illustrations in various states.
Unique, not published, and printed tentatively, for Dr. J.
Stockton-Hough.


COLONIAL SOCIETY.--The Colonial Society of America. 1881. _4to, light
brown levant morocco, filleted panels on the back, narrow side borders,
gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

The only complete copy printed on vellum. It contains several proofs
before letters, and the plates of the crest with two crowns, used for
only a few proofs before alteration and not found in any of the few
copies of the regular edition. The two illustrations and the cancelled
title-page are on paper.

Inserted is an autograph letter from Dr. John Stockton-Hough.


COLONNA, FRANCESCO.--The Strife of Love in a Dream being the Elizabethan
version of the first book of the Hypnerotomachia of Francesco Colonna
A new edition   by Andrew Lang, . . . London   published by David Nutt
. . . M DCCC X C. _Royal 8vo, boards, uncut edges._

One of five hundred copies printed.


COLUMBUS LETTER.--The Letter of Columbus on the Discovery of America
A Facsimile of the Pictorial Edition, with a New and Literal
Translation, and a Complete Reprint of the Oldest Four Editions in
Latin. Printed by Order of the Trustees of the Lenox Library New-York,
[De Vinne Press] M DCCC XCII. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 22 of two hundred and fifty copies printed on hand-made paper.


COLVIN, SIDNEY.--See Cust and Colvin.


COMBE, TAYLOR.--A Description of the Collection of Ancient Terracottas
in the British Museum; with engravings. [vignette]   London: printed by
W. Bulmer and Co . . . 1810. _Royal 4to, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Bedford._

Large paper copy. Seventy-nine copper-plate engravings, on forty plates,
by Schiavonetti, Worthington, Moses, Bromley, Heath, etc., in addition
to the vignette on the title-page.


COMBE, WILLIAM.--The English Dance of Death, from the designs of Thomas
Rowlandson, with metrical illustrations, by the author of "Doctor
Syntax.". . . London: printed by J. Diggens, . . . 1815. _8vo, two
volumes, russia, gilt back, side panels of interlaced fillets, centre
ornaments, gilt edges, by Petit._

Fifty-six coloured plates, including frontispieces and title-pages.


COMBE, WILLIAM.--The Dance of Life, a poem, by the author of "Doctor
Syntax"; illustrated with [26] coloured engravings, by Thomas
Rowlandson. . . . London: published by R. Ackermann, [printed by J.
Diggens] . . . 1817. _8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition: with last leaf of Advertisement.


COMBE, WILLIAM.--The History of Johnny Quae Genus, the little foundling
of the late Doctor Syntax: A Poem, by the author of the Three Tours. . . .
London: published by R. Ackermann, . . . 1822. _8vo, calf, gilt back,
side corners, gilt top, uncut edges._

Twenty-four coloured plates after Rowlandson.


COMBE, WILLIAM.--(I.) The Tour of Doctor Syntax In Search of the
Picturesque ["Picturesque" in a vignette] A Poem. . . . Pub^{d}. by R.
Ackermann, London, 1823. (II.) The Second Tour of Doctor Syntax, In
Search of Consolation; a poem. . . . London: published by R. Ackermann,
. . . 1823. (III.) The Third Tour of Doctor Syntax, In Search of a Wife.
A poem. [vignette]   London, Pub^{d}. 1823, by R. Ackermann, . . . _12mo,
three volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

Eighty coloured plates, including two frontispiece-titles. Volume II
contains the only printed title.


COMBE, WILLIAM.--The Tour of Doctor Syntax, In Search of the
Picturesque; a poem. . . . Third edition. London: R. Ackermann, . . .
[n. d.] _Royal 8vo, three volumes, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Eighty coloured plates dated 1815-21 by Rowlandson, including title to
Volume I, which reads "Sixth edition with new plates." The text of
Volume I reads "ninth edition" on page 1. The Preface in Volume III is
dated May 1, 1821.


COMIC DRAWING.--The Comic Drawing for the Million. [27 woodcuts]
London: Gilbert, . . . [n. d.] _12mo, original boards._


COMIC ETIQUETTE.--The Comic Etiquette; or Manners for the Million. By "a
nice young man." With numerous [12] illustrations. London: Gilbert, . . .
[n. d.] _12mo, original boards._


COMIC GEOGRAPHY.--The Comic Geography; [cut] or, world "turned inside
out." [13 woodcuts]   [n. p., n. d.] _12mo, original boards._


COMIC HISTORY.--The Comic History of England [21 woodcuts]   [n. p., n.
d.] _12mo, original boards._


COMIC HISTORY.--The Comic History of Rome, and the Rumuns. [27 woodcuts]
   London: Gilbert, . . . [n. d.] _12mo, original boards._


COMMUNION.--Order for the Administration of the Holy Communion and
Occasional Offices according to the Use of the Church of England
London   William Pickering   1848. _4to, vellum boards, gilt tooled,
uncut edges._


COMMUNION.--The New Week's Preparation For a Worthy receiving of the
Lord's Supper, As Recommended and Appointed By the Church of England . . .
The Thirty-sixth Edition. London: Printed by Assignment from the
Executors of the late Edw^{d}. Wicksteed, for Jn^{o}. Hinton, . . . _12mo,
original green morocco, gilt back, sides richly tooled within and around
a mosaic ornament, gilt edges._

Engraved title and frontispiece.


CONDORCET, MARQUIS DE.--See Paine, Thomas.


CONFESSION OF FAITH.--A Confession of Faith Owned and Consented to by
the Elders and Messengers Of the Churches In the Colony of Connecticut
in New-England, Assembled by Delegation at Say Brook   September 9th
1708. . . . New-London in N. E. Printed by Thomas Short, 1710. _12mo,
original sheep._


CONGRESSIONAL JOURNALS.--Extracts from the Journals of Congress relative
to the Capture and Condemnation of Prizes, and the Fitting out
Privateers; together with the Rules and Regulations of the Navy, And
Instructions to the Commanders of Private Ships of War. Philadelphia:
Printed by John Dunlap, M,DCC,LXXVI. _8vo, half green morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


CONSTABLE, JOHN.--See Leslie, C. R.


CONNOISSEUR, THE.--See British Essayists.


CONTINENTAL CONGRESS.--Extracts From the Votes and Proceedings Of the
American Continental Congress, Held at Philadelphia on the 5th of
September 1774. Containing The Bill of Rights, a List of Grievances,
Occasional Resolves, the Association, an Address to the People of
Great-Britain, and a Memorial to the Inhabitants of the British American
Colonies. Published by order of the Congress. Philadelphia: Printed by
William and Thomas Bradford, October 27th. M.DCC.LXXIV. _8vo, sprinkled
calf, gilt back, uncut edges, by Pratt._


CONWAY, MONCURE DANIEL.--Barons of the Potomack and the Rappahannock by
Moncure Daniel Conway   New York   The Grolier Club [The De Vinne Press]
   1892. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

One of three hundred and sixty copies printed on Italian hand-made
paper.


CONWAY, WILLIAM MARTIN.--Early Flemish Artists and their predecessors on
the Lower Rhine   by William Martin Conway . . . With Twenty-nine
Illustrations   London   Seeley & Co., . . . 1887 . . . _Crown 8vo,
cloth._


COOKE, WILLIAM.--Memoirs of Samuel Foote, Esq. with a Collection of his
genuine Bon-Mots, Anecdotes &c. mostly original. And Three of his
Dramatic Pieces, Not published in his Works . . . By William Cooke, Esq.
London: printed for Richard Phillips . . . 1805. _Post 8vo, three
volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Portrait engraved by Caroline Watson after F. Colson.


COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE.--The Spy; a tale of the neutral ground;
referring to some particular occurrences during the American War: also
pourtraying American Scenery and manners. . . . London: G. and W. B.
Whittaker, . . . 1822. _12mo, three volumes, red morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First English edition.


COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE.--The Last of the Mohicans; a narrative of 1757.
By the author of "The Spy," &c . . . London: John Miller, . . . 1826.
_12mo, three volumes, red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First English edition.


COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE.--The Prairie, a tale, by the author of The Spy
&c . . . London: Henry Colburn, . . . 1827. _12mo, three volumes, red
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First English edition.


COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE.--The Red Rover, a tale. By the author of "The
Spy," &c . . . London: Henry Colburn, . . . 1828. _12mo, three volumes,
red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First English edition.


COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE.--The Bravo. A Venetian Story. By the author of
"The Pilot", &c . . . London: Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, . . .
1831. _12mo, three volumes, red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First English edition.


COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE.--The Headsman; or, the Abbaye des Vignerons. A
tale. By the author of "The Bravo," &c. &c. . . . London: Richard
Bentley, . . . (successor to Henry Colburn.) 1833. _12mo, three volumes,
red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First English edition.


COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE.--Eve Effingham; or, Home. By J. Fenimore Cooper,
Esq. . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1838. _12mo, three volumes,
red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First English edition.


COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE.--Mercedes of Castile: or, the Voyage to Cathay.
By the Author of "The Bravo", "The Headsman," "The Last of the
Mohicans," &c. . . . In two volumes. . . . Philadelphia: Lea and
Blanchard. 1840. _12mo, two volumes, original brown cloth._

First edition.


COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE.--The Deerslayer: or, the First War-path. By the
Author of "The Last of the Mohicans", "The Pathfinder", "The Pioneers",
and "The Prairie". . . . In two volumes. . . . Philadelphia: Lea &
Blanchard. 1841. _12mo, two volumes, half brown levant morocco, gilt
top, by Stikeman._

First edition.


COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE.--Wyandotte; or, the Hutted Knoll. By J. Fenimore
Cooper, Esq., . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1843. _12mo, three
volumes, red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First English edition.


COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE.--Satanstoe; or, the Family of Littlepage. A tale
of the colony. By J. Fenimore Cooper, Esq. . . . London: Richard
Bentley, . . . 1845. _12mo, three volumes, red morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First English edition.


COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE.--The Chain-bearer; or, the Littlepage
Manuscripts. By J. Fenimore Cooper, Esq. . . . London: Richard Bentley,
. . . 1845. _12mo, three volumes, red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery._

First English edition.


COPPER PLATE MAGAZINE &c--(I.) The Copper Plate Magazine, or Monthly
Cabinet of Picturesque Prints, consisting of sublime and interesting
Views in Great Britain and Ireland, Beautifully Engraved by the Most
Eminent Artists from the Paintings and Drawings of the First Masters.
London. Printed for Harrison and C^{o}. . . . [1792-1802]   (II.) Select
Views of the Principal Buildings and other interesting and picturesque
objects in the Cities of Bath and Bristol, and their environs. Drawn and
engraved by W. Watts. With Topographical Illustrations. London: printed
by Bensley and Son, . . . for R. Bowyer, . . . 1819. _Royal 8vo, six
volumes in three, citron morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges,
by J. Wright._

Five volumes of the Copper Plate Magazine, with 250 engravings. The
views of Bath and Bristol contain fifteen plates, proofs on India paper.


CORDELIER.--Tales of the Cordelier metamorphosed, as narrated in a
manuscript from the Borromeo collection; and in the Cordelier Cheval of
M. [Alexis] Piron. With translations. [vignette]   London: Printed at
the Shakspeare Press, by W. Bulmer and W. Nicol. 1821. _4to, red
morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by R. W. Smith_.

One of sixty-four copies privately printed by George Hibbert, with
eleven etchings on India paper by J. R. Cruikshank.

The Italian text is on the upper half of the page, the English on the
lower. Piron's "Cordelier-Cheval" is on pages 39-54.


COREY, JOHN.--The Metamorphosis: or, the Old Lover Out-witted. A Farce.
As it is now Acted at the New Theatre in Lincolns-Inn-Fields. Written
Originally by the Famous Moliere. London: Printed for Bernard Lintott at
the Middle-Temple Gate in Fleet-street. 1704. Priee 1s. 6d. _4to,
green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A-H in fours, title on A1. Dedication to Clayton
Milbourn, first Prologue and Epilogue by Charles Johnson.


COREY, JOHN.--A Cure for Jealousie. A Comedy. As it was Acted at the New
Theatre in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by His Majestys Servants. [Three
lines from Horace]   London: Printed for Richard Harrison, at his Shop
in New-Inn, without Temple Barr: 1701: _4to, half cloth._

First edition. A-H in fours, title on A1. Dedicated to Edmund Fullwood.


CORIDON'S SONG And other Verses from various sources   With
Illustrations by Hugh Thomson And an Introduction by Austin Dobson
London   Macmillan and Co. . . . 1894. _Imperial 8vo, buckram, uncut
edges._

One of one hundred and fifty-two large paper copies printed.


"CORNWALL, BARRY."--See Procter, Bryan Waller.


CORSER, THOMAS.--Collectanea Anglo-Poetica: or, a bibliographical and
descriptive Catalogue of a portion of a collection of Early English
Poetry, with occasional extracts and remarks biographical and critical.
By the Rev. Thomas Corser, . . . [Manchester]   Printed for the Chetham
Society. M.DCCC.LX. [-M.DCCC.LXXXIII] _4to, eleven volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

Portrait by J. Hargreaves after H. Walker.

Presentation copy from the author to W. C. Hazlitt.


CORY, ISAAC PRESTON.--Ancient Fragments of the Phoenician, Chaldaean,
Egyptian, Tyrian, Carthaginian, Indian, Persian, and other writers; with
an introductory dissertation: and an inquiry into the philosophy and
trinity of the ancients. By Isaac Preston Cory . . . Second edition.
London: William Pickering. 1832. _8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._


CORY, ISAAC PRESTON.--Metaphysical Inquiry into the Method, Objects and
Result of Ancient and Modern Philosophy by Isaac Preston Cory . . .
London: William Pickering. 1833. _Post 8vo, half blue morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._


COSTELLO, LOUISA STUART, _editor_.--Specimens of the Early Poetry of
France from the time of the Troubadours and Trouveres to the reign of
Henri Quatre by Louisa Stuart Costello . . . London. William Pickering
1835. _Crown 8vo, half green morocco, uncut edges._

Four plates in gold and colours from ancient miniatures.


COSTELLO, LOUISA STUART.--The Rose Garden of Persia. By Louise Stuart
Costello: . . . London: Longman, Brown, Green, & Longmans. M DCCC XLV.
_Post 8vo, maroon levant morocco, gilt back, sides covered with panels
tooled in geometrical designs, gilt edges, by Riviere._

First edition, with illuminated pages and coloured borders.


COTTLE, JOSEPH.--Early Recollections; chiefly relating to the late
Samuel Taylor Coleridge, during his long residence in Bristol. By Joseph
Cottle   London: Longman . . . 1837. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, half green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Six portraits by Woodman.


COTTON, WILLIAM.--Sir Joshua Reynolds, and his Works. Gleanings from his
diary, unpublished manuscripts, and from other sources. By William
Cotton, . . . Edited by John Burnet, . . . London: Longman, Brown,
Green, Longmans, and Roberts, . . . 1856. _8vo, original cloth, uncut
edges._

Three portraits drawn by Julian Brewer, facsimiles and wood-cuts.


COUCH, JONATHAN.--A History of the Fishes of the British Islands. By
Jonathan Couch, . . . [252 coloured plates, from drawings by the author]
   London: Groombridge and Sons, . . . M DCCC LXVIII. [-IX] _Royal 8vo,
four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


COURTIER, PETER L.--The Lyre of Love . . . London: printed by Charles
Whittingham . . . for John Sharpe . . . 1806. _Crown 8vo, two volumes in
one, green morocco, gilt back, wide border on the sides, gilt edges._

Large paper copy, with proof impressions of the frontispieces by Cosway
and Westall.


COUSIN, VICTOR.--The Philosophy of the Beautiful from the French of
Victor Cousin translated with notes and an introduction by Jesse Cato
Daniel . . . London William Pickering 1848. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


COWLEY, HANNAH PARKHOUSE.--The Belle's Stratagem, a comedy, as acted at
the Theatre-Royal in Covent-Garden. By Mrs. Cowley. London: Printed
for T. Cadell, . . . 1782. _8vo, red morocco, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition. Title, dedication to the Queen and B-M2 in fours.


COWLEY, HANNAH PARKHOUSE.--The Town before you, a Comedy, as acted at
the Theatre-Royal, Covent-Garden. By Mrs. Cowley. London: printed by G.
Woodfall, for T.N. Longman . . . 1795. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

First edition. A2-H4 in eights, title on A2.


COWPER, WILLIAM, _editor_.--Olney Hymns, in three books. Book I. On
select Texts of Scripture. Book II. On occasional Subjects. Book III. On
the Progress and Changes of the Spiritual Life. . . . London: Printed
and Sold by W. Oliver . . . J. Buckland . . . and J. Johnson . . .
MDCCLXXIX. _12mo, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First edition. Many of the Hymns are by Cowper, and this copy has his
autograph on the fly-leaf.


COWPER, WILLIAM.--Poems by William Cowper, Of the Inner Temple, Esq. . . .
London: Printed for J. Johnson, . . . 1782. _8vo, calf, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


COWPER, WILLIAM.--The History of John Gilpin, As related by the late Mr.
Henderson. Shewing How he went farther than he intended, and came Home
safe at last. [woodcut]   London: Printed for W. Lane, Leadenhall-Street,
London: and sold by all other Booksellers. (Price Two-Pence.)
   [1785]. _Small 8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges,
by Riviere._

First printed anonymously in the "Public Advertiser," (November?) 1782.
Recited in 1785 in Freemason's Hall by Henderson, the comedian, it
attained so great a popularity that it was frequently printed. Cowper
wrote to his friend Unwin, November 4, 1782:--"You are perfectly at
liberty to deal with them [Gilpin and his feats] as you please. _Auctore
tantum anonymo, imprimantur_; and when printed, send me a copy."

According to Southey, "The ballad, which had then become the town talk,
was reprinted from the newspaper, wherein it had lain three years
dormant."

The present edition is in chap-book form, and was presumably published
("Price Two-Pence") in consequence of the popularity of the ballad due
to Henderson's recitation of it. There is no means of determining which
is the first edition. Probably several editions were published in the
present form for distribution when the poem was recited.


COWPER, WILLIAM.--The History of John Gilpin, How he went farther than
he intended, and came Home safe at last. [woodcut]   London: Printed for
J. Fielding Pater-noster-Row   (Price Three-pence.)   [1785]. _Small
8vo, red levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Another chap-book edition.


COWPER, WILLIAM.--The diverting history of John Gilpin: showing how he
went farther than he intended, and came safe home again. With six
illustrations by George Cruikshank, Engraved on Wood by Thompson,
Branston, Wright, Slader, and White. London: Charles Tilt . . .
MDCCCXXVIII. _Square 12mo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, with
the original covers bound in, by Riviere._


COWPER, WILLIAM.--The Task, a poem, in six books. By William Cowper, . . .
To which are added, by the same author, An Epistle to Joseph Hill,
Esq: Tirocinium, or a Review of Schools, and the History of John Gilpin.
London: printed for J. Johnson, . . . 1785. _8vo, green levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition of the "Task," and the first appearance of "John Gilpin"
among Cowper's Works.

In a letter subsequent to April 22, 1785, Cowper wrote to Mr. Newton:
"When I sent the copy of the _Task_ to Johnson [his publisher], I
desired, indeed, Mr. Unwin to ask him the question, whether or not he
would choose to make it a part of the volume? This I did merely with a
view to promote the sale of it. Johnson answered, 'By all means.' Some
months afterward, he enclosed a note to me in one of my packets, in
which he expressed a change of mind, alleging, that to print John Gilpin
would only be to print what had been hackneyed in every magazine, in
every shop, and at the corner of every street. I answered, that I
desired to be entirely governed by his opinion; and that if he chose to
waive it, I should be better pleased with the omission. Nothing more
passed between us upon the subject, and I concluded that I should never
have the immortal honour of being generally known as the author of John
Gilpin. In the last packet, however, down came John, very fairly
printed, and equipped for public appearance. The business having taken
this turn, I concluded that Johnson had adopted my original thought,
that it might prove advantageous to the sale; and as he had had the
trouble and expense of printing it, I corrected the copy, and let it
pass."--Southey's Life of Cowper, Volume II, pages 86-87.

Southey continues (page 96): "If Johnson had persisted in his first
intention of excluding that ballad [John Gilpin] from the volume,
because it had already been printed in so many forms and dispersed
everywhere through town and country, he would have committed a greater
mistake than when he suppressed Mr. Newton's preface. Upon second
thoughts he not only admitted it, but specified it in the title-page and
in the advertisement.". . .

"The first volume [Poems, 1782] had sold so slowly that it was not
thought prudent to publish the Task and its appendants as a second; but
the first, with a complete list of its contents, was advertised at the
end of the book; and of the many who were induced to read the Task
because it was written by the author of John Gilpin, not a few were led
to inquire for the previous volume because it was by the author of the
Task. In the second edition which was called for in the ensuing year,
the two volumes were connected as first and second, and in the numerous
editions that have succeeded each other they have never been
disunited."


COWPER, WILLIAM.--Poems, by William Cowper . . . A new Edition London:
printed for J. Johnson . . . 1798. _Foolscap 8vo, two volumes, sprinkled
calf, gilt back, yellow edges, by Bedford._

Ten engravings on copper by Angus, Heath, Medland, Parker, and others,
after the designs of Stothard, with a duplicate set coloured in
imitation of the original drawings.


COWPER WILLIAM.--Poems. 1798. _Foolscap 8vo, two volumes, boards, uncut
edges._

George Daniel's copy, with ten plates after the designs of Stothard.


COWPER, WILLIAM.--The Poetical Works of William Cowper . . . London
William Pickering 1830. _Post 8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait by H. Robinson.


COWPER, WILLIAM.--The Works of William Cowper, Esq. comprising his
poems, correspondence, and translations. With a Life of the author, by
the editor. Robert Southey, Esq . . . London: Baldwin and Cradock . . .
1835-6-7. _Foolscap 8vo, fifteen volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Eleven portraits and twenty-nine frontispieces and vignettes.


COWPER, WILLIAM.--Poems: by William Cowper. With a biographical and
critical introduction, by the Rev. Thomas Dale: and seventy-five
illustrations, engraved by J. Orrin Smith, from drawings by John
Gilbert. London: Tilt and Bogue . . . MDCCCXLI. _Small 4to, two volumes,
half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


COWPER, WILLIAM.--The Poetical Works of William Cowper [with a Memoir by
Sir Harris Nicolas, and a portrait of Cowper.]   London   William
Pickering   1843. _Foolscap 8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


COWPER, WILLIAM.--The Poetical Works of William Cowper [with a Memoir]
London. William Pickering   1853. _8vo, two volumes, russia, gilt back,
gilt over red edges, by Matthews._

Portrait engraved by H. Robinson.


COWPER, WILLIAM.--Poetical Works. 1853. _8vo, two volumes bound in four,
blue levant morocco, gilt back and side panels, with red mosaic in the
corners, gilt over uncut edges, by Matthews._

Another copy, illustrated by the insertion of one hundred and fifty-six
fine portraits and scenes illustrative of the Poems; also a singularly
interesting letter of four pages from Cowper to Lady Hesketh. The
illustrations include all the known series, comprising Cruikshank's
vignettes to John Gilpin, India proofs, the plates by Storer, Westall,
Harvey, etc., many fine portraits and views, the great majority on India
paper, and frequently in two states, before and after letters.


COWPER, WILLIAM.--Poetical Works. 1853. _8vo, two volumes, red levant
morocco, gilt back, rich border on the sides, silk linings, gilt edges,
by Riviere._

Another copy, illustrated by the insertion of two hundred and six
engravings on steel, copper, and wood, including seventeen portraits of
Cowper. These illustrations include the series by Storer and Greig,
Stothard, George Cruikshank (the six plates to John Gilpin), Westall,
Harvey, etc., and are with few exceptions proofs on India paper, in two
and three states.


COWPER, illustrated by a series of views, in, or near, the Park of
Weston-Underwood, Bucks. Accompanied with copious descriptions, and a
brief sketch of the poet's life. London: Printed by J. Swan, . . . 1803.
_Royal 4to, half blue straight-grain morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy. Portrait, engraved title and twelve other plates by
James Storer and John Greig.


COWPER, WILLIAM.--Memoir of the Early Life of William Cowper, Esq.
written by Himself, And never before published. With an appendix,
containing some of Cowper's religious letters, And other interesting
Documents, illustrative of the Memoir. London: printed for R. Edwards,
. . . 1816. _Post 8vo, blue straight-grain morocco, gilt back, side
corners, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Portrait by J. Kennerley.


COXE, EDWARD.--Miscellaneous Poetry: by Edward Coxe, Esq; of
Hampstead-Heath, Middlesex. . . . Bath, printed by R. Cruttwell; . . .
1805. _8vo, original boards, uncut edges._

Presentation copy from the author to Henry Rhodes.


COXE, WILLIAM.--Memoirs of Horatio, Lord Walpole. Selected from his
Correspondence and Papers, and connected with the History of the Times,
from 1678 to 1757. Illustrated with portraits. By William Coxe . . .
London, Printed at the Oriental Press . . . for T. Cadell, Jun. and W.
Davies . . . 1802. _Royal 4to, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Motte._

Large paper copy. Twenty-one portraits by Collyer, Birrell, Taylor,
etc., after drawings by Harding, Gardiner, etc., proofs in three states,
on satin and plate paper, also with the plate coloured.


COXE, WILLIAM.--Sketches of the Lives of Correggio, and Parmegiano.
London: Printed for Longman, . . . 1823. _8vo, original boards, uncut
edges._

Portrait of Correggio engraved by W. Bond.


CRABBE, GEORGE.--(I.) The Library. a poem. London: printed for J.
Dodsley, . . . M.DCC.LXXXI. [Price 2s.]   (II.) The Village: a poem. In
two books. by the Rev^{d}. George Crabbe, Chaplain to His Grace the Duke
of Rutland, &c. London: printed for J. Dodsley, . . . M.DCC.LXXXIII.
(III.) The News-paper: a poem. by The Reverend George Crabbe, Chaplain
to His Grace the Duke of Rutland. [Six lines in Latin from Ovid]
London: printed for J. Dodsley, . . . M. DCC. LXXXV. [Price 2s.]   _4to,
three works in one volume, brown morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

First editions. Preliminary and final blank leaves to "The Village."
"The Newspaper" is dedicated to Edward, Lord Thurlow, Lord High
Chancellor of Great Britain from "Belvoir Castle, February 20th, 1785."
E4 of this work is a leaf of advertisement.


CRABBE, GEORGE.--Tales of the Hall. By the Rev. George Crabbe, LL.B. . . .
London: John Murray, . . . 1819. _8vo, two volumes, original boards,
uncut edges._

First edition. Dedicated to the Duchess of Rutland.


CRABBE, GEORGE.--The Works of the Rev. George Crabbe . . . London: John
Murray . . . 1823. _8vo, five volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition, illustrated by the insertion of ten portraits, three
views, thirty-one plates by Heath after Westall, and nine by Adlard
after Corbould. Six of the Westall plates are in two states, India
proofs before and after letters; the rest are before the letters, and
one is the engraver's etching. The portraits are for the most part
proofs.


CRABBE, GEORGE.--The Poetical Works of the Rev. George Crabbe: with his
Letters and Journals, and his Life, by his Son . . . London: John Murray
. . . MDCCCXXXIV. _Post 8vo, eight volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Bedford._

Frontispieces and vignettes by Finden after Stanfield.


CRADOCK, JOSEPH.--Zobeide. A tragedy. As it is Acted at the
Theatre-Royal in Covent-Garden. . . . London: Printed for T. Cadell, . . .
M DCC LXXI. _8vo, morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, dedicated to Lady Scarsdale. Prologue by Goldsmith,
Epilogue by Murphy. A-M2 in fours.


CRAIG, W. M.--A Course of Lectures on Drawing, Painting, and Engraving,
considered as branches of elegant education. Delivered in the saloon of
the Royal Institution, in successive seasons, and read subsequently at
the Russell Institution, By W. M. Craig, . . . [woodcut]   London:
printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, . . . 1821. _8vo,
half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Aquatint frontispiece in five states. The dedication is dated January 1,
1822.


CRANE, WALTER.--Renascence a Book of Verse by Walter Crane. London:
Elkin Mathews . . . 1891. _4to, boards, uncut edges._

No. 13 of sixty-five large paper copies printed.


CRANE, WALTER.--The Claims of Decorative Art by Walter Crane   London
Lawrence and Bullen . . . M DCCC XCII. _4to, decorated cloth, uncut
edges._

No. 87 of one hundred and ten fine paper copies printed.


CRAUFURD, DAVID.--Love at first Sight. a Comedy, Acted at the New
Theatre in Little Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. by Her Majesties Servants.
Written by David Craufurd, Gent. [Line of Latin]   London: Printed for
R. Basset, . . . William Turner. . . . and John Chantry . . . [1704]
[Five lines of Advertisement]. _4to, citron levant morocco, gilt back
and edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A-K2 in fours, half-title on A1, title on A2.


CRAWFORD, FRANCIS MARION.--A Rose of Yesterday by F. Marion Crawford
London   Macmillan and Co., . . . 1897 . . . _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


CRIPPS, WILFRED JOSEPH.--Old French Plate: with tables of the Paris
date-letters, and fac-similes of other marks. A Handbook for the
Collector. By Wilfred Joseph Cripps, . . . with illustrations. London:
John Murray, . . . 1880. _8vo, cloth._


CROKER, THOMAS CROFTON, _editor_.--The Popular Songs of Ireland.
Collected and edited, with introductions and notes, by T. Crofton
Croker, Esq. London: Henry Colburn . . . M.DCCC.XXXIX. _12mo, green
calf, gilt back, scored sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._


CROLY AND DAGLEY.--Gems, principally from the Antique, drawn and etched
by Richard Dagley . . . with Illustrations in Verse by the Rev. George
Croly . . . London: printed for Hurst, Robinson, and Co. . . . 1822.
_Post 8vo, orange levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Smith-Mansell._

Twenty-one plates.


CROLY, GEORGE.--The Poetical Works of the Rev. George Croly . . .
embellished with twenty etchings by Dagley from Antique Gems. London:
Willis and Sotheran . . . [1830] _Crown 8vo, two volumes, green calf,
gilt back, gilt edges._


CROMEK, R. H., _editor_.--Remains of Nithsdale and Galloway Song: with
historical and traditional notices relative to the manners and customs
of the peasantry. Now first published by R. H. Cromek . . . London:
printed for T. Cadell and W. Davies . . . 1810. _8vo, half red morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bradstreet._

Large paper copy, with the title-page printed on India paper.


CROSS, JOHN WALTER.--See Eliot, George.


CROWE, CATHERINE.--The Night Side of Nature; or, Ghosts and Ghost Seers.
By Catherine Crowe. . . . London: T. C. Newby, . . . 1848. _Crown 8vo,
two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


CROWE AND CAVALCASELLE.--A new History of Painting in Italy from the
Second to the Fourteenth Century. Drawn up from fresh Materials after
recent researches in the Archives of Italy; as well as from personal
inspection of the Works of Art scattered throughout Europe. By J. A.
Crowe & G. B. Cavalcaselle London: John Murray . . . 1864. _8vo, three
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


CROWE AND CAVALCASELLE.--A History of Painting in North Italy; Venice,
Padua, Vicenza, Verona, Ferrara, Milan, Friuli, Brescia, from the
fourteenth to the sixteenth century. Drawn up from fresh materials &c . . .
By J. A. Crowe & G. B. Cavalcaselle . . . With illustrations.
London: John Murray . . . 1871. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


CROWE AND CAVALCASELLE.--The Early Flemish Painters. Notices of Their
Lives and Works. By J. A. Crowe and G. B. Cavalcaselle. Second edition
London: John Murray, . . . 1872. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Seventeen illustrations.


CROWE AND CAVALCASELLE.--Titian: his Life and his Times. With some
Account of his Family, chiefly from new and unpublished records. By J.
A. Crowe and G. B. Cavalcaselle . . . With portrait and illustrations.
London: John Murray . . . 1877. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Steel portrait and eighteen woodcuts.


CROWE AND CAVALCASELLE.--Raphael: his life and works, with particular
reference to recently discovered records, and an exhaustive study of
extant drawings and pictures. By J. A. Crowe and G. B. Cavalcaselle, . . .
London: John Murray, . . . 1882. _8vo, two volumes, half red morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._


CROWE, SIR JOSEPH.--Reminiscences of Thirty-five Years of my Life By Sir
Joseph Crowe . . . With [2] plans London   John Murray . . . 1895. _8vo,
cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


CRUIKSHANK, GEORGE.--George Cruikshank's Illustrations of

  Humphrey Clinker.  | Joseph Andrews.
  Roderick Random.   | Amelia.
  Peregrine Pickle.  | Vicar of Wakefield.
  Tom Jones.         | Sir Lancelot Greaves.

Forty-one plates, with extracts describing each subject. London: Charles
Tilt, . . . M DCCC XXXVI. _Post 8vo, olive morocco, gilt edges, by The
Club Bindery._

The first nine plates have the imprint, "London, Printed for Cochrane
and Pickersgill, 1831," Nos. 10 to 29, "for James Cochrane & Co. 1831,"
and Nos. 30-41, "for James Cochrane & Co. 1832."


CRUIKSHANK, GEORGE.--George Cruikshank's Table-book. Edited by Gilbert
Abbott a Beckett. Illustrated by George Cruikshank. London: published at
the Punch Office, . . . M DCCC XLV. _Royal 8vo, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Twelve steel plates, woodcut title-page, and numerous illustrations in
the text.


CRUIKSHANK, ROBERT.--Cruikshank at Home: a New Family Album of Endless
Entertainment. With numerous illustrations engraved on wood . . . [three
volumes]   The Odd Volume; or Book of Variety: illustrated by Two Odd
Fellows,--Seymour and Cruikshank London: Henry G. Bohn . . . 1845. _Post
8vo, four volumes in two, half citron levant morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges._

In consequence of a disagreement between the brothers Cruikshank, the
designs intended for a fourth series of "Cruikshank at Home,"
incorporated with the work of Seymour, produced "The Odd Volume."


CUMBERLAND, G.--Inventions by G. Cumberland [London] Publish'd Jan 1.
1795. _Royal 4to, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by V. Krafft._

Engraved frontispiece title and 23 other outline plates. The Preface is
dated June, 1796.


CUMBERLAND, GEORGE.--An Essay on the utility of collecting the best
works of the ancient engravers of the Italian school; accompanied by A
Critical Catalogue with interesting anecdotes of the engravers, of a
chronological series of rare and valuable prints, from the earliest
practice of the art in Italy to the year 1549, now deposited in
the British Museum and Royal Academy, in London, by George
Cumberland.--London. Printed by W. Nicol, . . . 1827. _4to, half red
levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Portrait of the author and double plate of engraver's marks.


CUMBERLAND, GEORGE.--Outlines from the Ancients. [with an Introduction
by G. C. umberland] [London 1829]   _Folio, half blue morocco, gilt
back._

Sixty plates, proofs on India paper, engraved by F. C. Lewis.


CUMBERLAND, RICHARD.--The Mysterious Husband. A tragedy in five acts. As
it is acted at the Theatre-Royal, Covent-Garden. By Richard Cumberland,
Esq. London: printed for C. Dilly, . . . and J. Walter, . . . M. DCC.
LXXXIII. _8vo, red morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


CUMBERLAND, RICHARD.--The Posthumous Dramatic Works of the late Richard
Cumberland, Esq . . . London: printed for G. and W. Nicol, . . . by W.
Bulmer and Co . . . 1813. _8vo, two volumes, half calf, gilt back, uncut
edges._

Edited by T. W. Jansen.


CUNDALL, JOSEPH, _editor_.--On Bookbindings ancient and modern edited by
Joseph Cundall . . . [woodcut]   London: George Bell and Sons . . .
1881. _4to, half blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Twenty-eight plates.


CUNNINGHAM, ALLAN.--Sir Marmaduke Maxwell, a dramatic poem; the Mermaid
of Galloway; the Legend of Richard Faulder; and Twenty Scottish Songs.
By Allan Cunningham . . . London: printed for Taylor and Hessey, . . .
1822. _12mo, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._


CUNNINGHAM, ALLAN, _editor_.--The Songs of Scotland, ancient and modern;
with an introduction and notes, Historical and Critical, and Characters
of the Lyric Poets. . . . By Allan Cunningham, . . . London: printed for
John Taylor, . . . 1825. _Crown 8vo, four volumes, half brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._


CUNNINGHAM, ALLAN.--The Lives of the most eminent British Painters,
Sculptors, and Architects. By Allan Cunningham. Second edition. London:
John Murray, . . . MDCCCXXX. _Foolscap 8vo, six volumes, original cloth,
uncut edges._

Illustrated with thirty-one steel portraits and nine woodcuts.


CUNNINGHAM, ALLAN, _editor_.--The Cabinet Gallery of Pictures, selected
from the Splendid Collections of Art, public and private, which adorn
Great Britain; with biographical and critical descriptions by Allan
Cunningham. London: John Major . . . MDCCCXXXIII. _Royal 8vo, two
volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut
edges._

First issue. Large paper copy. Seventy-three engravings, proofs on India
paper. The plate of the Blind Fiddler, by Wilkie, inserted in this
copy, is not mentioned in the index, though the publishers evidently
projected it as one of the series. A letter inserted from Edmund Hodgson
explains the usual defection.


CUNNINGHAM, ALLAN.--The Life of Sir David Wilkie; with his journals,
tours, and critical remarks on Works of Art; and a selection from his
correspondence. By Allan Cunningham. London: John Murray . . . 1843.
_8vo, three volumes, citron levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back, gilt
edges, by Bedford._

Illustrated by the insertion of one hundred and seventy portraits, and
plates engraved from Wilkie's paintings, of which a large number are
brilliant proofs, some in two states.


CUNNINGHAM, ALLAN.--Poems and Songs by Allan Cunningham. With an
introduction, glossary, and notes by Peter Cunningham. London: John
Murray . . . 1847. _Small 8vo, cloth, uncut edges, with the original
covers._


CUNNINGHAM, HENRY WINCHESTER.--Christian Remick   an early Boston artist
   A Paper read by Henry Winchester Cunningham At a Meeting of the Club
of Odd Volumes of Boston, Massachusetts, February 24, 1904   Boston
the Club of Odd Volumes [University Press]   1904. _4to, half brown
morocco, uncut edges._

No. 64 of one hundred copies printed.


CUNNINGHAM, JOHN.--Poems, chiefly Pastoral. By John Cunningham . . .
London: Printed for the Author; . . . M.DCC.LXVI. _8vo, half green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Frontispiece by Isaac Taylor, and (inserted) a portrait of the author,
proof on India paper.


CUNNINGHAM, PLANCHE, AND COLLIER.--Inigo Jones. A life of the architect;
by Peter Cunningham, Esq. Remarks on some of his sketches for masques
and dramas; by J. R. Planche, Esq. and Five Court Masques; edited from
the original MSS. of Ben Jonson, John Marston, etc. by J. Payne Collier,
Esq.   accompanied by facsimiles [15] of drawings by Inigo Jones; and by
a portrait from a painting by Vandyck. London: printed for the
Shakespeare Society. 1848. _8vo, original cloth, uncut edges._


CUNNINGHAM, PETER.--The Story of Nell Gwyn: and the Sayings of Charles
the Second. Related and collected By Peter Cunningham, . . . [vignette]
. . . London: Bradbury & Evans, . . . M DCCC LII. _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First separate edition, with woodcuts. Originally published in "The
Gentleman's Magazine," 1851.


CUNNINGHAM AND LAING.--Inigo Jones and Ben Jonson: being the Life of
Inigo Jones. By Peter Cunningham. Illustrated with numerous facsimiles
of his designs for masques. And Ben Jonson's Conversations with Drummond
of Hawthornden. Edited By David Laing. [London]   Printed for the
Shakespeare Society, . . . 1853. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Inigo Jones, by W. Holl after Vandyke. The first sub-title
is dated 1848, the second, 1842.


CUNNINGHAM, PETER.--See Burnet and Cunningham.


CUPID.--The Cupid: a collection of love songs reprinted from the first
edition   Privately printed for subscribers only at   The Moray Press
Derby   1891. _8vo, blue levant morocco, Janseniste, doubled with brown
morocco ornamented with a gilt and chiselled panel of floral and peacock
design, blue silk guards, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original
covers bound in, by Pomey._

One hundred copies printed on Van Gelder paper. Fifteen illustrations on
Japan paper by Paul Avril, Milius, and others.


CURRAN, JOHN PHILPOT.--A new and enlarged collection of Speeches, by the
Right Honourable John Philpot Curran, . . . containing several of
importance, in no former collection; with Memoirs of Mr. Curran, and his
portrait. London: printed for William Hone, . . . 1819. _8vo, half olive
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Bound with HONE'S "Annals of the Revolution in France," 1830.


CURTIS, GEORGE WILLIAM.--Washington Irving: A Sketch. By George William
Curtis. New York: The Grolier Club   MDCCCXCI. _4to, red morocco, with
Club seal on the sides, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portraits of Matilda Hoffman and Irving, and cut of Cockloft Hall Summer
House.

One of three hundred and forty-four copies printed.


CURTIS, GEORGE WILLIAM.--Prue & I   by George William Curtis
illustrated from drawings by Albert Edward Storner . . . Harper &
Brothers   New York   MDCCCXCII. _8vo, vellum, uncut edges._

Two hundred and fifty copies printed, with etched frontispiece signed by
the artist. A signature of the artist is also inserted.


CUST AND COLVIN.--History of the Society of Dilettanti compiled by
Lionel Cust, . . . and edited by Sidney Colvin, . . . Printed for the
Society   London   Macmillan and Co., . . . 1898. _8vo, buckram, uncut
edges._

No. 139 of three hundred and fifty copies printed, with seventeen
illustrations.


DALLAS, ROBERT CHARLES.--Recollections of the Life of Lord Byron, from
the year 1808 to the end of 1814; exhibiting his early character and
opinions, detailing the progress of his literary career, and including
various unpublished passages of his works. Taken from authentic
documents, in the possession of the author. By the late R. C. Dallas,
Esq. to which is prefixed, an account of the circumstances leading to
the suppression of Lord Byron's correspondence with the author, and his
letters to his mother, lately announced for publication. London: printed
for Charles Knight, . . . MDCCCXXIV. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

Facsimile frontispiece.


DALLAWAY, JAMES.--Of Statuary and Sculpture among the Antients. With
some account of specimens preserved in England. By James Dallaway, . . .
London: printed by T. Bensley and Son, . . . for J. Murray, . . . 1816.
_Royal 8vo, blue straight-grain morocco, gilt back, side borders, uncut
edges._

Large paper copy: twenty-nine outline etchings printed in red.


[DALTON, ----] The Gentleman in Black. With Illustrations, by George
Cruikshank. Engraved by J. Thompson and C. Landells. London: William
Kidd . . . MDCCCXXXI. _12mo, cloth, uncut edges._

A portion of this work appeared originally in a periodical called "The
Literary Magnet."


DANA AND WILSON.--The Life of Ulysses S. Grant, General of the Armies of
the United States. By Charles A. Dana, . . . and J.H. Wilson, . . .
Published by Gurdon Bill & Company, Springfield, Mass. &c . . . 1868.
_8vo, half blue morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by W.
Matthews._

Portrait by F.T. Stuart, and three maps.


DANA, RICHARD H.--Poems; by Richard H. Dana. Boston, Bowles and Dearborn
. . . 1827. _18mo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, side border, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


DANCE OF DEATH.--The Dance of Death exhibited in elegant engravings on
wood with a Dissertation on the several representations of that subject
but more particularly on those ascribed to Macaber and Hans Holbein. By
Francis Douce &c London: William Pickering   1833. _8vo, brown levant
morocco, gilt back, side panels, doubled with dark brown silk, narrow
borders, silk guards, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Forty-nine woodcut illustrations from the Lyons series, and six others.
Large paper copy.


DANCE OF DEATH.--Holbein's Dance of Death, with an historical and
literary introduction. London: John Russell Smith, . . . M. D. CCC.
XLIX. _Post 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Frontispiece and fifty-three illustrations on India paper.


DANCE OF DEATH.--The celebrated Hans Holbein's Alphabet of Death,
illustrated with old borders engraved on wood with Latin sentences and
English quatrains selected by Anatole de Montaiglon [cut]   Paris.
Printed for Edwin Tross [by Firmin Didot brothers]   M.DCCC.LVI. _Small
4to, half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Vellum paper copy. The engraved borders, etc., are by Leon Le Maire, and
are partly copied from the well-known _Horae_ of Simon Vostre.


DANCE OF DEATH.--Holbein's Dance of Death exhibited in elegant
engravings on wood, With a Dissertation on the several Representations
of that Subject, By Francis Douce, . . . also, Holbein's Bible Cuts,
consisting of ninety illustrations on wood, with introduction by Thos.
Frognall Dibdin. London: Henry G. Bohn, . . . 1858. _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


DANIEL, GEORGE.--The Modern Dunciad   Virgil in London and other poems
London   William Pickering   1835. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


DANIEL, GEORGE.--The Modern Dunciad. 1835. _Post 8vo, green
straight-grain morocco, back and sides tooled in the manner of Roger
Payne, with the initials G. D., gilt edges, by C. Lewis._

George Daniel's own copy, in which he has inserted his own private
portrait, proof on India paper, also portraits of Samuel Johnson, proof
before the letters, R. Owen, L. Sterne, Scott and his family, etc.


DANIEL, GEORGE.--Merrie England in the Olden Time. By George Daniel . . .
London: Richard Bentley . . . 1842. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition, with five plates by Leech and twenty-three woodcut
illustrations.


DANIEL, GEORGE.--Democritus in London with the mad Pranks and comical
Conceits of Motley and Robin Good-fellow to which are added notes
festivous etc. London   William Pickering   1852. _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


DANTE ALLEGHIERI.--The Vita Nuova of Dante, translated, with an
introduction and notes, by Theodore Martin. London: Parker Son, and
Brown, . . . 1862. _Small 4to, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Dante.


DANTE ALLEGHIERI.--The Comedy of Dante Alleghieri. Part I--The Hell.
Translated into English blank verse by William Michael Rossetti, with
introductions and notes. London . . . Macmillan and Co. 1865. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


DANTE.--See Boccaccio, Giovanni. Rossetti, Dante Gabriel. Rossetti,
William Michael.


D'ANVERS, N.--An Elementary History of Art.
Architecture--Sculpture--Painting by N. D'Anvers . . . second edition
with introduction by Professor Roger Smith. London. Sampson Low, . . .
1882. _Crown 8vo, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

One hundred and eighty-five woodcut illustrations.


D'ARBLAY, MADAME.--Evelina, or, a Young Lady's entrance into the World.
[By Fanny Burney]   London: Printed for T. Lowndes . . . M.DCC.LXXVIII.
_12mo, three volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by David._

First edition.


D'ARBLAY, MADAME.--Cecilia, or Memoirs of an Heiress. By the author of
Evelina. London: Printed for T. Payne and Son . . . MDCCLXXXII. _12mo,
five volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
David._

First edition.


D'ARBLAY, MADAME.--Camilla: or, a Picture of Youth. By the author of
Evelina and Cecilia. London: Printed for T. Payne . . . and T. Cadell
Jun. and W. Davies . . . 1796. _12mo, five volumes, red levant morocco,
gilt back, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


D'ARBLAY, MADAME.--The Wanderer; or, Female Difficulties. By the Author
of Evelina; Cecilia; and Camilla. In five volumes. . . . London: printed
for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, . . . 1814. _12mo, five
volumes, green levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition. Dedication to Dr. Burney, dated March 14, 1815, and
signed F. B. d'Arblay.


D'ARBLAY, MADAME.--The Romance of Private Life. By Miss Burney. . . .
London: Henry Colburn, . . . 1839. _Post 8vo, three volumes, original
boards, uncut edges._

First edition.


D'ARBLAY, MADAME.--Diary and Letters of Madame d'Arblay . . . Edited by
her Niece . . . London: Henry Colburn . . . 1843-2-6. _Crown 8vo, seven
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

In addition to the seven portraits and two facsimiles belonging to this
edition, one hundred and eight additional portraits have been inserted.


DARIUS'S FEAST: or, The Force of Truth. A Poem, Addressed To the Right
Honourable the Earls of Salisbury and Exeter. London: Printed by Lawton
Gilliver . . . 1734. _Folio, red levant morocco, by The Club Bindery.
Bound with ten other works._


DARLEY, FELIX OCTAVIUS CARR.--Sketches Abroad with Pen and Pencil. By
Felix O. C. Darley. The [85] Drawings engraved on Wood by J. Augustus
Bogert and James L. Langridge. New York: published by Hurd and Houghton,
. . . 1868. _12mo, half red morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Matthews._


DAVENPORT, CYRIL.--. . . English Embroidered Bookbindings by Cyril
Davenport, . . . London   Kegan Paul, Trench, Truebner and Company, . . .
1899. _4to, green silk, back and sides embroidered in a floral and
scroll design of yellow, pink, lavender, and green, gilt over uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Japanese vellum copy, fifty printed. Fifty-two plates, some coloured,
and illustrations in the text.


DAVENPORT, CYRIL.--Thomas Berthelet Royal Printer and Bookbinder to
Henry VIII. King of England with special reference to his bookbindings
by Cyril Davenport . . . Chicago   published by the Caxton Club   M
DCCCC I. _Royal 4to, half cloth, uncut edges._

One of two hundred and fifty-two copies printed. Eighteen plates, for
the most part coloured.


DAVEY, SAMUEL.--See Scott and Davey.


DAVIDSON, JOHN.--Plays by John Davidson being: an unhistorical pastoral:
a romantic farce: Bruce a chronicle play: Smith a tragic farce: and
Scaramouch in Naxos a pantomime [vignette]   London: Elkin Mathews and
John Lane . . . 1894. _4to, cloth, uncut edges._

Frontispiece.


DAVIES, C. M.--History of Holland, from the beginning of the Tenth to
the end of the Eighteenth Century. By C. M. Davies. London: John W.
Parker . . . M.DCCC.XLI. _8vo, three volumes, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt over uncut edges, by Holloway._

Original issue with the genuine title-pages.

Illustrated by the insertion of one hundred and fifty-eight portraits,
etc., brilliant copper-plate engravings, by Crispin de Pass, Wierix,
Houbraken (some unlettered proofs), Sadeler, Ficquet, Savart, Peter de
Jode, Marcenay de Ghuy (unlettered proofs), Delaram, Raphael Morghen,
Moncornet, etc.


DAVIS, WILLIAM.--A Journey [and Second Journey] Round the Library of a
Bibliomaniac: or, cento of notes and reminiscences concerning rare,
curious, and valuable Books. By William Davis . . . London: Printed for
W. Davis . . . 1821-25. _Crown 8vo, two volumes in one, half green
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

The two series complete.


DAVY, SIR HUMPHREY.--Salmonia: or Days of Fly Fishing. In a series of
Conversations. With some account of the Habits of Fishes belonging to
the genus Salmo. London: John Murray . . . MDCCCXXIX. _Small 8vo, green
levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Zaehnsdorf._

First edition: illustrated by the insertion of twenty-five portraits,
forty-six views of lakes, etc., seventeen vignettes of fish, for the
most part on India paper, and some India proof woodcuts laid on the
beginning and end of chapters, in addition to the six plates and
numerous woodcuts of fish belonging to the book.


DAY, THOMAS.--The History of Sandford and Merton, a work Intended for
the Use of Children . . . London; Printed for J. Stockdale, . . .
MDCCLXXXIII.-VI-IX. _Small 8vo, three volumes, half green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, by Roger de Coverly._

First edition. Frontispieces by Cooper after Stothard, etc., from a
later edition.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The True-Born Englishman. A Satyr. [Five lines in
Latin]   Printed in the Year MDCCI. _4to, brown levant morocco, gilt
back, side panels, gilt edges, by Riviere._

First edition (?).

The second edition has a Preface in which Defoe vindicates himself from
the charge of depreciating his countrymen.

The ninth edition was also printed in 1701, and it is said that 80,000
copies were sold in the streets. The King honoured Defoe for the first
time with an audience.

Collation: Title, A1 (verso blank). Preface beginning, "The End of Satyr
is Reformation," A2. Part I, A3-D3 recto in fours. Part II, D3 verso-H4.
Pages 1-60; 30 and 31 reversed, 48-49 misprinted 58-59.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--(I.) Reasons against a War with France, or an Argument
shewing That the French King's Owning the Prince of Wales as King of
England, Scotland and Ireland; is No Sufficient Ground of A War. London
   Printed in the year, 1701. (II.) The Double Welcome. A Poem to the
Duke of Marlbro'. London: Printed, and Sold by B. Bragg . . . 1705.
(III.) A Fair Shell, but A Rotten Kernel: or, A Bitter Nut for A
Factious Monkey. . . . London, Printed: And Sold by B. Bragge, . . .
1705. . . . _4to, three works in one volume, brown morocco, gilt edges,
by The Club Bindery._

First editions.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Mock Mourners. A Satyr, By way of Elegy on King
William. By the Author of The True-born Englishman. London, Printed
1702. _4to, green levant morocco, gilt fillets, uncut edges._

First edition.

A, two leaves, B-D in fours, E and ¶, two leaves each. Dedicated to the
Queen.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--A Hymn to the Pillory. London: Printed in the Year,
MDCCIII. _4to, brown levant morocco, gilt back, side panels, uncut
edges, by David._

First edition.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Storm: or, a collection Of the most Remarkable
Casualties and Disasters which happen'd in the Late Dreadful Tempest,
[Nov. 26, 1703] both by Sea and Land . . . London: Printed for G.
Sawbridge . . . MDCCIV. _8vo, half brown levant morocco, Janseniste,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Stikeman._

First edition.


[DEFOE, DANIEL].--(I.) Moderation Display'd: a poem. [Three lines from
Lucret. lib. 5.]   By the Author of Faction Display'd. London: Printed
in the Year 1704. (II.) The Sequel: or Moderation Further Display'd, a
poem. By the Author of Faction Display'd. [Two lines from Aul. per. 2.
Sat. 2.]   Printed in the Year 1705. _4to, two works in one volume._

Both works: two leaves and B-D2 in fours.

"Faction Displayed" is attributed to Defoe and also to W. Shippen.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Consolidator: or, Memoirs of Sundry Transactions
from the World in the Moon. Translated from the Lunar Language, By the
Author of The True-born English Man. London: Printed, and are to be
Sold by Benj. Bragg . . . 1705. _8vo, red morocco, gilt edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition; with the half-title marked "A."


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Dyet of Poland, a Satyr. Printed At Dantzick, in the
Year MDCCV. _4to, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by David._

First edition.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The History of the Wars, Of his Present Majesty
Charles XII. King of Sweden; From his First Landing in Denmark, To His
Return from Turkey to Pomerania. By a Scots Gentleman in the Sweedish
Service. London: Printed for A. Bell in Cornhil, . . . 1715. _8vo, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--(I.) The Life and Strange Surprizing Adventures of
Robinson Crusoe, of York, Mariner: Who lived Eight and Twenty Years, all
alone in an un-inhabited Island on the Coast of America, near the Mouth
of the Great River of Oroonoque; Having been cast on Shore by Shipwreck,
wherein all the Men perished but himself. With An Account how he was at
last as strangely deliver'd by Pyrates. Written by Himself.
[frontispiece]   London: Printed for W. Taylor . . . MDCCXIX. (II.) The
Farther Adventures of Robinson Crusoe; Being the Second and Last Part of
his Life, And of the Strange Surprizing Accounts of his Travels Round
three Parts of the Globe. Written by Himself. To which is added a Map of
the World, in which is Delineated the Voyages of Robinson Crusoe.
London: Printed for W. Taylor . . . MDCCXIX. (III.) Serious Reflections
during the Life And Surprising Adventures of Robinson Crusoe: with his
Vision of the Angelick World. Written by Himself. [folded frontispiece]
   London: Printed for W. Taylor, . . . 1720. _8vo, three volumes, red
levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First editions.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Life and strange surprizing Adventures of Robinson
Crusoe, of York, Mariner, Who lived eight and twenty years all alone in
an uninhabited Island on the Coast of America near the mouth of the
Great River of Oroonoque, having been cast on Shore by Shipwreck,
wherein all the Men perished but himself. With an account how he was at
last as strangely delivered by Pyrates. Written by himself. [with a Life
of the author by George Chalmers]   London: printed for John Stockdale
. . . 1790. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, olive morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Pratt._

Large paper copy with a portrait, fourteen plates and two vignette
titles engraved by Medland after the designs of Stothard.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--La Vie et les Aventures De Robinson Crusoe, Par Daniel
Defoe; traduction Revue et corrigee sur la Edition donnee par Stockdale
en 1790, augmentee de la vie de l' Auteur, qui n'avoit pas encore paru;
Edition Ornee de 19 gravures [en couleur] par Delignon, d'apres les
dessins originaux de Stothart, d'une Carte Geographique, et accompagnee
d'un vocabulaire de Marine. . . . [coloured vignette]   A Paris Chez H.
Verdiere, . . . [1800.]   _8vo, three volumes, calf, gilt back, side
panels, gilt edges._


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Life and Adventures of Robinson Crusoe. Embellished
with engravings from designs by Thomas Stothard . . . London: printed
for T. Cadell and W. Davies . . . 1820. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, red
levant morocco, back and sides richly tooled, gilt edges, with some
rough leaves, by C. Lewis._

Large paper copy, with twenty plates and two vignettes engraved by C.
Heath.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--Engravings illustrative of Robinson Crusoe, from
drawings by Thomas Stothard, engraved by C. Heath. [London, Cadell and
Davies, . . . 1820.] _Folio, half green morocco portfolio._

Twenty-two proofs on India paper.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--Robinson Crusoe, par Daniel De Foe, traduction de
l'Anglais, entierement revue et corrigee par F. D'A. A Paris, chez
Crevot . . . MDCCCXXV. _8vo, two volumes, blue straight-grain morocco,
back and sides gilt and blind tooled, gilt edges._

Large paper copy, illustrated by six plates after the designs of
Deveria, each in three states, viz., engraver's etching, India proof,
and plain print, also the original drawings.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Life and surprising Adventures of Robinson Crusoe,
of York, Mariner. With introductory verses by Bernard Barton, and
illustrated with numerous engravings from drawings by George Cruikshank
expressly designed for this edition. . . . London: printed at the
Shakspeare Press, by W. Nicol, for John Major, . . . 1831. _Post 8vo,
two volumes, green levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt over uncut edges, by
Louise Reymann._

Large paper copy, with frontispieces on India paper, by Aug. Fox and W.
Raddon after Cruikshank, and thirty-seven woodcuts in the text.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Life and Adventures of Robinson Crusoe. With a
biographical sketch of De Foe, written expressly for this edition, and
illustrations from original designs. . . . London: Cochrane and
Pickersgill, . . . 1831. _Post 8vo, two volumes, half maroon levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by V. Krafft._

Portrait by Freeman, and sixteen other plates.


DEFOE, DANIEL.-- . . . The Life and Adventures of Robinson Crusoe
Mariner, of Hull by Daniel Defoe With Biographical Memoir and
Illustrative Notes [by John Ballantyne] . . . With Eight Etchings by M.
Mouilleron and Portrait by L. Flameng   London   J. C. Nimmo and Bain . . .
1882. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 71 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with proof
etchings on Japan paper.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The History of the Life and Adventures of Mr. Duncan
Campbell, a Gentleman, who, tho' Deaf and Dumb, writes down any
Stranger's Name at first Sight; with their future Contingencies of
Fortune. Now Living In Exeter Court over-against the Savoy in the
Strand. [Three lines from Cicero] London: Printed for E. Curll: And
sold by W. Mears and T. Jauncy. . . , W. Meadows. . . , A.
Bettesworth. . . , W. Lewis. . . , and W. Graves . . . M. DCC. XX. _8vo,
red levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Portrait by Price after Hill, and three plates. After
page 240, an entirely different fount of type is used from that in the
first part of the book.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Fortunes and Misfortunes Of the Famous Moll
Flanders, &c. Who was born in Newgate, and during a Life of continu'd
Variety for Threescore Years, besides her childhood, was Twelve year
a Whore, five times a wife (whereof once to her own Brother) Twelve year
a Thief, Eight year a Transported Felon in Virginia, at last grew
Rich, liv'd Honest, and died a Penitent. Written from her own
Memorandums. London: Printed for, and Sold by W. Chetwood, . . . M DDC
XXI. [M DCC XXI] _8vo, red levant morocco, narrow side borders, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with the blank leaf, A8.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--A Journal of the Plague Year: being Observations or
Memorials, Of the most Remarkable Occurrences, As well publick as
private, which happened in London During the last Great Visitation In
1665. Written by a Citizen who continued all the while in London. Never
made publick before London: Printed for E. Nutt. . . ; J. Roberts. . . ;
A. Dodd. . . ; and J. Graves. . . . 1722. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt
back and sides, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with the half-title.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--A Narrative Of all the Robberies, Escapes, &c. of John
Sheppard: Giving an Exact Description of the manner of his wonderful
Escape from the Castle in Newgate, and of the Methods he took
afterward for his Security. Written by himself during his Confinement
in the Middle Stone-Room, after his being retaken in Drury-Lane. To
which is added, A true Representation of his Escape from the
Condemn'd Hold, curiously engraven on a Copper Plate. The whole
Publish'd at the particular Request of the Prisoner. London:
Printed and Sold by John Applebee, . . . 1724. (Price Six Pence.) _8vo,
brown levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

A perfect copy, with frontispiece, "The manner of Escape," a second
plate, inserted, "Jack Shepherd in the Stone Room in Newgate," probably
from Charles Johnson's "History of the Lives and Actions of the most
famous Highwaymen," etc., and, also inserted, a plate in seven
compartments by N. Parr, representing scenes relative to Newgate.

The Narrative is dated "Middle-Stone-Room in Newgate, Novem. 10. 1724,"
and ends with a "Postscript," D3 (verso blank). Seven editions were
printed in 1724, on November 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 28 and December 12.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--A Tour Thro' the whole Island of Great Britain, Divided
into Circuits or Journies. giving A Particular and Diverting Account of
whatever is Curious and worth Observation, Viz. I. A Description of the
Principal Cities and Towns, their Situation, Magnitude, Government, and
Commerce. II. The Customs, Manners, Speech, as also the Exercises,
Diversions, and Employment of the People. III. The Produce and
Improvement of the Lands, the Trade, and Manufactures. IV. The Sea Ports
and Fortifications, the Course of Rivers, and the Inland Navigation.
V. The Publick Edifices, Seats, and Palaces of the Nobility and Gentry.
With Useful Observations upon the Whole. Particularly fitted for the
Reading of such as desire to Travel over the Island. By a Gentleman.
London: Printed, and Sold by G. Strahan, . . . W. Mears, . . . R.
Francklin, . . . S. Chapman, . . . R. Stagg, . . . and J. Graves, . . .
M DCC XXIV. [M DCC XXV. and M DCC XXVII.] _8vo, three volumes, red
levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by Riviere._

First edition of Volumes I and II, second of Volume III. Volume I
contains a folded plate of the Siege of Colchester in 1648, and consists
of three letters, with separate pagination and signatures, the last leaf
containing Addenda and Errata. Volume II contains a folded map of
England and Wales, by Herman Moll, Geographer, and consists of three
letters, the third with separate pagination and signatures, and an Index
of xxxvi pages to the first two volumes. Volume III contains a folded
map of Scotland by Moll. The three letters, pages 1-239, are followed by
an "Introduction to the Account and Description of Scotland," pages
1-230, two Indexes (21 pages) and 5 pages of Advertisements.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Fortunate Mistress: Or, A History Of The Life
And Vast Variety of Fortunes Of Mademoiselle de Beleau, Afterwards
Call'd The Countess de Wintselsheim, in Germany. Being the
Person known by the Name of the Lady Roxana, in the Time of King
Charles II. London: Printed for T. Warner . . . ; W. Meadows . . . ; W.
Pepper . . . ; S. Harding . . . ; and T. Edlin. . . . 1724. _8vo, red
levant morocco, rich gilt back and side borders, doubled with red
morocco, gilt borders, red silk guards, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition. Full-length portrait of Roxana.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Life and Adventures of Roxana, the fortunate
mistress; or, most unhappy wife.

   I. An Account of her Birth in France, in 1683.

   II. Her Marriage in London with a Brewer, who ran out his
   Estate, and left her in a destitute Condition with five
   Children.

   III. Her cohabiting with her Landlord, their Journey to
   Paris, where her Gallant was robbed, and murdered.

   IV. Her being in Love with by the Prince of ---- by whom she
   had a Son; her going with the Prince to the Palace of Mendon,
   where she saw her Husband, who had entered in the Gens d'Arms
   Guard, the Prince leaves her.

   V. The Dealings she had with a Dutch Merchant and a Jew, the
   latter of whom wanted to defraud her of a great Parcel of her
   Jewels, her Return, in a dangerous Storm to England; her
   going afterwards to Rotterdam, where she sees the Dutch
   Merchant, to whom she soon after became a Bedfellow.

   VI. Her return to England again, living a great Lady, where
   she had the Name of Roxana. Her Marriage with the Dutch
   Merchant in London, who was naturalized, and created a
   Baronet; the Miseries she and her Maid Amy fell afterwards
   into.

Embellished with curious Copper Plates. London: Printed for H. Owen, . . .
and C. Sympson, . . . M DCC LV. _Small 8vo, blue levant morocco,
gilt back and edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Portrait by Parr, and folded plate, "Roxana in her Turkish Habit."

A later edition of "The Fortunate Mistress," divided into chapters, as
the first edition was not, and containing two leaves of Contents. The
text of the first edition ends on page 344, in the middle of chapter
xvii, but the work has been extended by the unknown editor through page
463 into twenty-two chapters in the manner of Defoe. (Chapter xx is
misprinted xix.) The last page contains a paragraph headed "The
Continuation of the Life of Roxana, by Isabel Johnson, who had been
her Waiting-Maid, from the Time she was thrown into Jail, to the Time
of her Death." The text of the last page of the first edition is not
here included.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--A new Voyage round the World, by a Course never sailed
before. being a Voyage undertaken by some Merchants, who afterwards
proposed the Setting up an East-India Company in Flanders.
Illustrated with Copper Plates.   London:   Printed for A.
Bettesworth, . . . and W. Mears, . . . M.DCC.XXV. _8vo, red
straight-grain morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, in two parts, with separate pagination and signatures.
Frontispiece by J. Clark, and three other plates.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--A new Voyage round the World. 1725. _8vo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Another copy.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--An Essay upon Literature: or, An Enquiry into the
Antiquity and Original of Letters; proving That the two Tables, written
by the Finger of God in Mount Sinai, was the first Writing in the
World; and that all other Alphabets derive from the Hebrew. With a
short View of the Methods made use of by the Antients, to supply
the want of Letters before, and improve the use of them, after they
were known. London; Printed for Tho. Bowles, . . . John Clark, . . . and
John Bowles, . . . M.DCC.XXVI. _8vo, red morocco, gilt back, side
corners, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Political History of the Devil, as well ancient as
modern: in two parts. Part I. Containing a State of the Devil's
Circumstances, and the various Turns of his Affairs, from his
Expulsion out of Heaven, to the Creation of Man; with Remarks on the
several Mistakes concerning the Reason and Manner of his Fall.
Also his Proceedings with Mankind ever since Adam, to the first
planting of the Christian Religion in the World. Part II. Containing
his more private Conduct, down to the present Times: His Government,
his Appearances, his Manner of Working, and the Tools he works with.
[Four lines of English verse] London: Printed for T. Warner, . . . 1726.
_8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by
Riviere._

First edition, with frontispiece.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--A System of Magick; or, a History of the Black Art.
Being an Historical Account of Mankind's most early Dealing with the
Devil; and how the Acquaintance on both Sides first began. . . .
London, Printed: And Sold by J. Roberts . . . MDCC XXVII. _Crown 8vo,
red levant morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece by J. Van der Gucht after Eberlein.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--An Essay on the History and Reality of Apparitions.
Being An Account of what they are, and what they are not; whence they
come, and whence they come not. As also How we may distinguish between
the Apparitions of Good and Evil Spirits, and how we ought to Behave to
them. With A great Variety of Surprizing and Diverting Examples, never
Publish'd before. . . . London, Printed: And Sold by J. Roberts. . . .
M DCC XXVII. _8vo, red morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with six plates by J. Van der Gucht.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--Conjugal Lewdness: or, Matrimonial Whoredom. [Ten
lines of verse beginning "Loose Thoughts, at first, like
subterranean Fires"] London: Printed for T. Warner, . . . M DCC XXVII.
_8vo, panelled calf, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Riviere._

First edition, issued January 30.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--A Treatise concerning The Use and Abuse of the Marriage
Bed: shewing I. The Nature of Matrimony, its Sacred Original, and the
true Meaning of its Institution. II. The gross Abuse of
Matrimonial Chastity, from the wrong Notions which have possessed
the World, degenerating even to Whoredom. III. The Diabolical Practice
of attempting to prevent child-bearing by Physical Preparations. IV.
The fatal Consequences of clandestine or forced Marriage, thro' the
Persuasion, Interest, or Influence of Parents and Relations, to
wed the Person they have no Love for, but oftentimes an Aversion to.
V. Of unequal Matches, as to the Disproportion of Age; and how such,
many ways, occasion a Matrimonial Whoredom. VI. How married Persons
may be guilty of Conjugal Lewdness, and that a Man may, in effect,
make a Whore of his own Wife. Also, many other Particulars of Family
Concern. [Ten lines of verse as in the first issue]   London; Printed
for T. Warner, . . . M. DCC. XXVII. Price 5 s. _8vo, Spanish calf, gilt
back, gilt edges, by Pratt._

Second issue of "Conjugal Lewdness," printed June 10, with a new
title-page, but the same sheets, including the uncorrected Errata at the
end.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Memoirs of an English Officer, Who serv'd in the
Dutch War in 1672. to the Peace of Utrecht, in 1713. Containing Several
Remarkable Transactions both by Sea and Land, and in divers Countries,
but chiefly those wherein the Author was personally concern'd.
Together with A Description of many Cities, Towns, and Countries, in
which he resided; their Manners and Customs, as well Religious as
Civil, interspers'd with many curious Observations on their
Monasteries and Nunneries, more particularly of the famous one in
Montserat. On the Bull-Feasts, and other publick Diversions; as also
on the Genius of the Spanish People, amongst whom he continued
several Years a Prisoner of War. No Part of which has before been
made publick. By Capt. George Carleton. London, Printed for E. Symon, . . .
M DCC XXVIII. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Large paper copy of the first edition. Dedicated to Spencer, Lord
Wilmington.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Life and Adventures of Mrs. Christian Davies,
commonly call'd Mother Ross; Who, in several Campaigns Under King
William and the Late Duke of Marlborough, In the Quality of A
Foot-Soldier and Dragoon, Gave many signal Proofs of an unparallell'd
Courage and personal Bravery. Taken from her own Mouth when A
Pensioner of Chelsea-Hospital, And known to be true by Many who
were engaged in those great Scenes of Action. London: Printed for and
Sold by R. Montagu, . . . 1740. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back,
side borders, gilt edges, by Riviere._

First edition. In two parts, with separate pagination and signatures,
and the final leaf of advertisement, Q4.


DEFOE, DANIEL.--The Novels and Miscellaneous Works of Daniel De Foe.
With a Biographical Memoir of the Author, Literary Prefaces to the
various pieces, illustrative notes, etc., including all contained in the
edition attributed to the late Sir Walter Scott, with considerable
additions. Oxford: Printed by D. A. Talboys, for Thomas Tegg . . .
London 1840-'41. _Foolscap 8vo, twenty volumes, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

The twentieth volume contains a Life of Defoe by George Chalmers, and a
chronological list of his works.


[DELEPIERRE, JOSEPH OCTAVE.]--Joseph Octave Delepierre   Born, 12 March
1802; Died, 18 August 1879   In Memoriam   For friends only   [London,
1879.] _4to, brown levant morocco, doubled with russia, russia guards,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Published by the Philobiblon Society. Portrait.


DELILLE (OR DELISLE), JACQUES.--The Gardens, a poem. Translated from the
French of the Abbe de Lille. By Mrs. Montolieu. The second edition.
London: printed by T. Bensley . . . 1805. _Royal 8vo, half red levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Krafft._

Whatman paper copy with four plates and four vignettes, engraved by
Bartolozzi.


DE LOLME, JOHN LOUIS.--The History of the Flagellants, or The Advantages
of Discipline; Being a Paraphrase and Commentary On the Historia
Flagellantium of the Abbe Boileau, Doctor of the Sorbonne, Canon of the
Holy Chapel, &c. By Somebody who is not of the Sorbonne. . . .
[vignette]   London: Printed for Fielding and Walker, . . . M DCC
LXXVII. _Royal 4to, half cloth, gilt top, many lower edges uncut._

Four plates and four vignettes by Le Roy after Le Clerc.


DENNIS, GEORGE.--The Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria. By George Dennis
   London: John Murray . . . 1848. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition, with ten maps and one hundred and five illustrations.


DENNISTOUN, JAMES.--Memoirs of the Dukes of Urbino, illustrating the
Arms, Arts, and Literature of Italy from 1440 to 1630. By James
Dennistoun. London: Longman &c   1851. _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

Thirty-four illustrations on steel and wood.


DENNISTOUN, JAMES.--Memoirs of Sir Robert Strange, Knt., engraver . . .
and of his brother-in-law Andrew Lumisden, private secretary to the
Stuart princes, . . . By James Dennistoun . . . London: Longman, . . .
1855. _Post 8vo, two volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Sir Robert by W. C. Edwards after J. B. Greuse, and three
other plates.


DE QUINCEY, THOMAS.--Confessions of an English Opium-Eater. London:
printed for Taylor and Hessey . . . 1822. _12mo, calf, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DE QUINCEY, THOMAS.--Confessions of an English Opium-Eater reprinted
from the first edition, with notes of De Quincey's Conversations by
Richard Woodhouse, and other additions   Edited by Richard Garnett.
London   Kegan Paul, Trench, & Co . . . MDCCCLXXXV. _Crown 8vo, original
covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed.


DERBY, GEORGE HORATIO.--Phoenixiana by Capt. George Horatio Derby
("John Phoenix") edited by John Vance Cheney   Chicago   The Caxton
Club   MDCCCXCVII. _16mo, two volumes, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

One of one hundred and sixty-five copies printed on American hand-made
paper. Etched portrait by W. H. W. Bicknell, and fifteen other
illustrations, five in colours.


DE TOCQUEVILLE, ALEXIS.--Democracy in America. By Alexis de Tocqueville.
Translated by Henry Reeve, Esq. Edited, with notes, The Translation
Revised and in great part Rewritten, and the Additions made to the
recent Paris Editions now first translated, By Francis Bowen, . . .
Cambridge: Sever and Francis. 1864. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._


DE VINNE, THEODORE LOW.--The Invention of Printing. A Collection of
Facts and Opinions descriptive of early prints and playing cards, the
block-books of the fifteenth century, the legend of Lourens Janszoon
Coster, of Haarlem, and the work of John Gutenberg and his associates.
Illustrated with facsimiles of early types and wood-cuts. [145] By
Theo. L. De Vinne. . . . New York: Francis Hart and Co. . . . 1876.
_8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


DE VINNE, THEODORE LOW.--Historic Printing Types a lecture read before
the Grolier Club of New-York, January 25, 1885, with additions and new
illustrations by Theo. L. De Vinne   New-York   The Grolier Club
MDCCCLXXXVI. _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt top,
uncut edges, by William Matthews._

One of two copies printed on vellum. A presentation copy from the
author.


DE VINNE, THEODORE LOW.--Christopher Plantin and the Plantin-Moretus
Museum at Antwerp by Theo. L. De Vinne with illustrations by Joseph
Pennell, and others   Printed for the Grolier Club   New York   1888.
_8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, side panels of interlacing
fillets, corner ornaments, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original
paper covers bound in, by Riviere._

One of three hundred copies printed on paper.


DE VINNE, THEODORE LOW.--The Practice of Typography a treatise on the
processes of type-making the point system, the names, sizes styles and
prices of Plain Printing Types by Theodore Low De Vinne   New York   The
Century Co.   1900. _12mo, cloth._

Presentation copy from the author.


DE VINNE, THEODORE LOW.--The Practice of Typography Correct Composition
a treatise on spelling abbreviations, the compounding and division of
words, the proper use of figures and numerals, italic and capital
letters, notes, etc. with Observations on Punctuation and Proof-reading
by Theodore Low De Vinne, . . . New York   The Century Co.   1901.
_12mo, cloth._

Presentation copy from the author.


DE VINNE, THEODORE LOW.--Title-pages as seen by a Printer with numerous
illustrations in facsimile and some observations on the early and recent
printing of books by Theodore Low De Vinne   The Grolier Club of the
City of New York   M C M I. _8vo, original half red straight-grain
morocco, uncut edges._

Three hundred and twenty-five copies printed on Italian hand-made
paper.


DE VINNE, THEODORE LOW.--The Practice of Typography   A Treatise on
Title-pages with numerous illustrations in facsimile and some
observations on the early and recent printing of books by Theodore Low
De Vinne, . . . New York   The Century Co.   1902. _12mo, cloth._

Presentation copy from the author.


DE VINNE, THEODORE LOW.--The Practice of Typography   Modern Methods of
Book Composition   a treatise on type-setting by hand and by machine and
on the proper arrangement and imposition of pages by Theodore Low
DeVinne, A. M.   New York   The Century Co.   1904. _12mo, cloth._

Presentation copy from the author.


DIALOGUE.--The Dialogue or Communing between the Wise King Salomon and
Marcolphus. Edited by E. Gordon Duff   London: Lawrence & Bullen . . .
MDCCCXCII. _Square 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Three hundred and fifty copies printed, with woodcut frontispiece, etc.,
and facsimile of the original Antwerp edition, probably put forth in
1492.


DIBDIN, CHARLES.--The Cobler: or, A Wife of Ten Thousand. A ballad
opera. In two acts. As it is performed at the Theatre-Royal, Drury-Lane.
London: Printed for T. Becket, . . . 1774. . . . _8vo, morocco, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition.


DIBDIN, CHARLES.--Songs, naval and national, of the late Charles Dibdin;
with a Memoir and Addenda. Collected and arranged by Thomas Dibdin . . .
with characteristic Sketches by George Cruikshank   London: John Murray
. . . 1841. _Post 8vo, half brown levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Krafft._


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--An Introduction to the Knowledge of the Most
Rare and Valuable Editions of the Greek and Latin Classics, with some
Account of Polyglot Bibles and the best editions of the Greek Septuagint
and Testament. By Tho. Frognall Dibdin . . . Second edition, enlarged &
corrected. London: Printed for the Author . . . 1804. _Royal 8vo, brown
morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by Bedford._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with a portrait of Bishop Fell, a
vignette designed by the author, and three facsimile plates.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--An Introduction to the Knowledge of rare and
valuable editions of the Greek and Latin Classics. Together with an
account of polyglot Bibles, polyglot Psalters, Hebrew Bibles, Greek
Bibles and Greek Testaments; the Greek Fathers, and the Latin Fathers.
By the Rev. Thomas Frognall Dibdin, . . . Fourth Edition; greatly
enlarged and corrected. . . . London: printed for Harding and Lepard, . . .
and G. B. Whittaker, . . . 1827. _8vo, two volumes, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by William Matthews._


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--Specimen Bibliothecae Brittanicae. Specimen of a
Digested Catalogue of Rare, Curious, and Useful Books in the English
Language, or appertaining to British Literature and Antiquities. By the
Rev. T. F. Dibdin. London: 1808. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

Forty copies privately printed.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--Specimen of an English De Bure. London. 1810.
_8vo, boards, uncut edges._

One of fifty copies privately printed.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--Typographical Antiquities; or the History of
Printing in England, Scotland, and Ireland: containing Memoirs of our
Ancient Printers, and a register of the books printed by them. Begun by
the late Joseph Ames, . . . Considerably augmented by William Herbert,
. . . And now greatly enlarged, with Copious Notes, and illustrated with
appropriate engravings; Comprehending the History of English Literature,
and a View of the Progress of the Art of Engraving, in Great Britain; By
the Rev. Thomas Frognall Dibdin. . . . London: printed by William
Savage, . . . for William Miller, . . . [1810]-1819. _Folio, four
volumes, pigskin, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Large paper copy, sixty-six printed, with twenty-three mezzo-tint
portraits, etc., and numerous facsimiles.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--Here begyneth a little tome and hathe to name
The Lincolne Nosegay: beynge a brefe table of certaine bokes in the
posession of Maister Thomas Dibdin clerk. Which bookes be to be sold to
him who shal gyue the moste for ye same   London: Printed by W. Bulmer
and Co, . . . [1811] _8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back, sides
covered with flowers and leaf sprays in compartments, doubled with blue
morocco, inside border, gilt end papers, gilt edges, by Lewis._

The genuine edition. Thirty-six copies printed. The nineteen books
described went into the Spencer and Heber collections.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--Bibliography, a Poem, in Six Books. With
Preface and Notes. London: 1812. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

Fifty copies, privately printed, the greater part destroyed by fire.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--Bibliotheca Spenceriana; or a Descriptive
Catalogue of the books printed in The Fifteenth Century, and of many
valuable first editions, in the Library of George John Earl Spencer, K.
G. . . . by the Reverend Thomas Frognall Dibdin. . . . London: printed
for the author, by W. Bulmer and Co. Shakspeare Press. . . . 1814-[1815]
_Royal 8vo, four volumes, brown morocco, gilt back, side corners, gilt
edges, by Bedford._

Frontispiece, the quarterings of Lord Spencer's arms, by V. Woodthorpe
after Sir Isaac Heard, dedicatory page engraved by Woodthorpe, and
numerous facsimiles.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--The Bibliographical Decameron; or Ten Days
Pleasant Discourse upon Illuminated Manuscripts and Subjects connected
with Early Engraving, Typography and Bibliography by the Rev. T. F.
Dibdin   London: Printed for the Author by W. Bulmer & Co. Shakespeare
Press   1817. _Royal 8vo, three volumes, red morocco, gilt back, sunken
panels on the sides, gilt tooled, doubled with red morocco, gilt
borders, gilt edges, by Lewis._


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--A Bibliographical, Antiquarian and Picturesque
Tour in France and Germany, by the Rev. Tho. Frognall Dibdin . . .
London: printed for the Author by W. Bulmer and W. Nicol, Shakespeare
Press &c 1821. _Royal 8vo, three volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back,
side panels and corners, gilt edges, by Bedford._

In addition to the eighty-three plates published with this book, two
hundred and thirty-six have been added, embracing the Lewis etchings,
proofs on India paper, sixty-eight portraits, including the author by
Thomson after Phillips, Evelyn by Worthington after Walker, Aldus and
Paulus Manutius, etc. With a few exceptions, every plate inserted is a
proof on India paper.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--A Bibliographical, Antiquarian and Picturesque
Tour &c, 1821. _Royal 8vo, three volumes, half russia, gilt back, uncut
edges._

Another copy printed upon large paper.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--Voyage Bibliographique, Archeologique et
Pittoresque en France, par le Rev. Th. Frognall Dibdin . . . Traduit de
l'Anglais, avec des Notes, par Theod. Licquet . . . A Paris, chez
Crapelet . . . MDCCCXXV. _Imperial 8vo, four volumes, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Cape._

Large paper copy, with portrait of the author by Thomson after Phillips,
India proof, and seventy other portraits and views inserted, including
many proofs after Turner and others.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--Aedes Althorpianae; or an Account of the
Mansion, Books, and Pictures, at Althorp; the residence of George John
Earl Spencer, K. G. to which is added a Supplement to the Bibliotheca
Spenceriana. By the Rev. Thomas Frognall Dibdin, . . . London: printed
by W. Nicol, . . . Shakspeare Press, . . . 1822. _Royal 8vo, two volumes
in one, brown morocco, gilt back, side corners, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Frontispiece-portrait of Lord Spencer by W. Finden after Thomas
Phillips, on India paper, twenty-nine other portraits and views, five
illustrations on India paper in the text, and numerous facsimiles.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--A Descriptive Catalogue of the Books printed
in the Fifteenth Century, lately forming part of the library of the Duke
di Cassano Serra, and now the property of George John Earl Spencer, K.
G. with a general index of authors and editions contained in the present
volume, and in the Bibliotheca Spenceriana and AEdes Althorpianae. By the
Reverend Thomas Frognall Dibdin, . . . London: printed for the author by
William Nicol, Shakspeare Press, . . . 1823. _Royal 8vo, brown morocco,
gilt back, side corners, gilt edges, by Bedford._


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--Bibliophobia. Remarks on the present languid
and depressed state of Literature and the book trade. In a Letter
addressed to the author of the Bibliomania. By Mercurius Rusticus. With
notes by Cato Parvus. . . . London: Henry Bohn, . . . 1832. _8vo,
boards, uncut edges._

Presentation copy from the Author to William Palmer.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--Reminiscences of a Literary Life; [with
Anecdotes of Books, and of Book Collectors] by the Reverend Thos.
Frognall Dibdin D. D. London: John Major . . . MDCCCXXXVI. _8vo, two
volumes, tree calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Ten steel portraits and plates and many woodcuts. Includes the Index,
which is generally missing.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--Reminiscences of a Literary Life. 1836. _8vo,
two volumes, blue morocco, gilt fillets, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Another copy, printed upon large paper, and with a few additional
portraits, some proofs.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--A Bibliographical, Antiquarian and Picturesque
Tour in the Northern Counties of England and in Scotland. By the
Reverend Thomas Frognall Dibdin   London: printed for the Author by C.
Richards . . . MDCCCXXXVIII. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, green morocco,
gilt back and sides, gilt edges._

One of the few copies with the ninety plates and vignettes, proofs on
India paper.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--A Bibliographical . . . Tour in the Northern
Counties. 1838. _Royal 8vo, two volumes extended to three, red levant
morocco, rich gilt back and side corners, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Large paper copy, extra-illustrated by the insertion of one hundred and
fifty-two plates. The original illustrations are in duplicate, and there
are many other rare proof portraits and views, besides thirteen of the
cancelled pages.


DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL.--(I.) Bibliomania; or Book-Madness; a
bibliographical romance. Illustrated with cuts. By Thomas Frognall
Dibdin, . . . New and improved Edition, to which are now added
preliminary observations, and a supplement including a key to the
assumed characters in the drama, [vignette by S. Freeman]   London:
Henry G. Bohn, . . . M DCCC XLII. (II.) The Bibliomania; or
Book-Madness; containing some account of the history, symptoms, and cure
of this fatal disease. In an epistle to Richard Heber, Esq. by the Rev.
Thomas Frognall Dibdin, . . . London: reprinted from the first edition,
published in 1809. _8vo, two works in one volume, half russia, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Frontispiece, vignette on the title, and numerous woodcuts.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Village Coquettes: A Comic Opera, in two acts. By
Charles Dickens. The Music by John Hullah. London: Richard Bentley . . .
1836. _8vo, calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Sunday under Three Heads. As it is; As Sabbath Bills
would make it; As it might be made. By Timothy Sparks. London: Chapman
and Hall, . . . 1836. _Post 8vo, calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Strange Gentleman: A Comic Burletta, in two Acts.
By "Boz." First performed at the St. James Theatre, on Thursday,
September 29. 1836. London: Chapman and Hall . . . MDCCCXXXVII. _8vo,
calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Sketches of Young Ladies; in which these interesting
members of the Animal Kingdom are classified according to their several
instincts, habits, and general characteristics. By "Quiz." With six
illustrations by "Phiz". London: Chapman and Hall . . . MDCCCXXXVII.
_Post 8vo, calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club. By
Charles Dickens. With forty-three illustrations by R. Seymour and Phiz.
London: Chapman and Hall . . . MDCCCXXXVII. _8vo, calf, gilt back and
side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club. By
Charles Dickens. With a frontispiece from a design by C. R. Leslie, . . .
engraved by J. Thompson. London: Chapman and Hall, . . . MDCCCXLVII.
_8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original green
paper covers bound in, by Riviere._


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Sketches of Young Gentlemen. Dedicated to the Young
Ladies. With six illustrations by "Phiz." London: Chapman and Hall . . .
MDCCCXXXVIII. _Post 8vo, calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Memoirs of Joseph Grimaldi. Edited by "Boz" with
illustrations by George Cruikshank. London: Richard Bentley . . . 1838.
_Crown 8vo, two volumes, calf gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

First edition, with the ornamental part of the original binding bound
in, portrait of Grimaldi, and thirteen plates.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Oliver Twist; or the Parish Boy's Progress. By "Boz."
London: Richard Bentley . . . 1838. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, calf,
gilt back, side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Twenty-four plates by Cruikshank.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Adventures of Oliver Twist; or The Parish Boy's
Progress. By Charles Dickens. With twenty-four illustrations on steel,
by George Cruikshank. A new edition, revised and corrected. London:
published for the author, by Bradbury & Evans, . . . MDCCCXLVI. _8vo,
calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First octavo edition, with the original covers inserted.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Sketches by Boz illustrative of every-day life and
every-day people. With forty illustrations by George Cruikshank. New
edition, complete. London: Chapman and Hall, . . . 1839. _8vo, cloth,
uncut edges_.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby. By
Charles Dickens. With illustrations by Phiz. London: Chapman and Hall . . .
MDCCCXXXIX. _8vo, calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

First edition, with a portrait of the author by Maclise, and thirty-nine
plates by H. K. Browne.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Sketches of Young Couples; with an urgent
remonstrance to the gentlemen of England (being bachelors or widowers)
on the present alarming Crisis. By the Author of "Sketches of Young
Gentlemen". With six illustrations by "Phiz". London: Chapman and Hall
MDCCCXL. _Post 8vo, calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES, _editor_.--The Pic Nic Papers. By various hands.
Edited by Charles Dickens, . . . With [14] Illustrations by George
Cruikshank, Phiz, &c. . . . London: Henry Colburn, . . . M DCCC XLI.
_Crown 8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Master Humphrey's Clock. By Charles Dickens. With
illustrations by George Cattermole and Hablot Browne. London: Chapman
and Hall   MDCCCXL-XLI. _Royal 8vo, three volumes, calf, gilt back and
side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--American Notes for General Circulation. By Charles
Dickens. London: Chapman and Hall   MDCCCXLII. _Crown 8vo, two volumes,
calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--A Christmas Carol. In prose. Being A Ghost Story of
Christmas. By Charles Dickens. With illustrations by John Leech. London:
Chapman & Hall, . . . M DCCC XLIII. _Post 8vo, original cloth, gilt
edges._

First edition, with four coloured plates and four woodcuts by Linton.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Life and Adventures of Martin Chuzzlewit. By
Charles Dickens. With illustrations by Phiz. London: Chapman and Hall
MDCCCXLIV. _8vo, calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Chimes: A Goblin Story of some Bells that rang an
Old Year out and a New Year in. By Charles Dickens. Thirteenth Edition.
London: Chapman and Hall . . . MDCCCXLV. _Post 8vo, calf, gilt back and
side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Frontispiece, engraved title by Maclise, and eleven other illustrations
by Leech, Doyle and Stanfield.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Battle of Life, a Love Story. By Charles Dickens.
London: Bradbury & Evans . . . MDCCCXLVI. _Post 8vo, calf, gilt back and
side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Cricket on the Hearth, a Fairy Tale of Home. By
Charles Dickens. London: Printed and published for the Author by
Bradbury and Evans   M DCCC XLVI. _Post 8vo, calf, gilt back and side
panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Pictures from Italy. By Charles Dickens. The vignette
illustrations on wood by Samuel Palmer. London: . . . Bradbury & Evans
. . . MDCCCXLVI. _Post 8vo, calf gilt back and side panels, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Haunted Man and the Ghost's Bargain. A Fancy for
Christmas Time. By Charles Dickens. London: Bradbury & Evans . . . 1848.
_Post 8vo, calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Dombey and Son. By Charles Dickens. With
illustrations by H. K. Browne. London: Bradbury and Evans, . . . 1848.
_8vo, one volume in two, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, with the original covers bound in, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. The engraved title is in extenso, reading, "Dealings with
the firm of Dombey and Son, Wholesale, Retail and for Exportation."


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Personal History of David Copperfield. By Charles
Dickens. With illustrations by H. K. Browne. London: Bradbury & Evans . . .
1850. _8vo, calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--A Child's History of England. By Charles Dickens.
With a frontispiece by F. M. Topham. London: Bradbury & Evans   1852
['53-'54]   _Post 8vo, three volumes, calf, gilt back and side panels,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Bleak House. By Charles Dickens. With illustrations
[39] by H. K. Browne. London: Bradbury and Evans . . . 1853. _8vo, brown
levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, with the
original blue covers bound in, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Hard Times, for these Times. By Charles Dickens.
London: Bradbury & Evans . . . 1854. _Post 8vo, calf, gilt back and side
panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Little Dorrit. By Charles Dickens. With illustrations
by H. K. Browne. London: Bradbury and Evans . . . 1857. _8vo, calf, gilt
back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Story of Little Dombey   By Charles Dickens.
London: Bradbury & Evans, . . 1858. _Foolscap 8vo, green levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Poor Traveller: Boots at the Holly-tree Inn: and
Mrs. Gamp. By Charles Dickens. London: Bradbury & Evans, . . . 1858.
_Foolscap 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, with the
original green paper wrappers bound in, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--A Tale of Two Cities. By Charles Dickens. With
illustrations by H. K. Browne. London: Chapman and Hall   MDCCCLIX.
_8vo, calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--[The Original Christmas Numbers to "All the Year
Round", containing the "Christmas Books" by Charles Dickens. London
1859-1867]   _Royal 8vo, half olive levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._


DICKENS, CHARLES.--[The Original Numbers from "All the Year Round"
containing "The Uncommercial Traveller"   London   1860]   _Royal 8vo,
half olive levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Zaehnsdorf._


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Uncommercial Traveller by Charles Dickens.
London: Chapman and Hall, . . . MDCCCLXI. _Post 8vo, red morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Great Expectations. By Charles Dickens   London:
Chapman and Hall . . . M DCCC LXI. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, calf, gilt
back, side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Our Mutual Friend. By Charles Dickens. With
illustrations [40] by Marcus Stone. London: Chapman and Hall, . . .
1865. _8vo, two volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back and sides,
gilt top, uncut edges, with the original blue covers bound in, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--The Mystery of Edwin Drood. By Charles Dickens. With
twelve illustrations by S. L. Fildes, and a Portrait. London: Chapman
and Hall . . . 1870. _8vo, calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


DICKENS, CHARLES.--Hunted Down: A Story by Charles Dickens. With some
account of Thomas Griffiths Wainewright, the Poisoner. London: John
Camden Hotten   [1871] _8vo, calf, gilt back and side panels, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Riviere._


DICKENS, CHARLES.--See Forster, John. (Life.)


DIDEROT, DENIS.--See Gessner, S.


DIGBY, KENELM HENRY.--The Broad Stone of Honour; or Rules for the
Gentlemen of England. London: Printed (with alterations from the first
edition) for C. & J. Rivington . . . 1823. _8vo, blue morocco, back and
sides richly tooled, gilt edges, by Lewis._

Large paper copy of the second edition, published anonymously, while the
author was a Protestant. On becoming a Roman Catholic, he rewrote the
work.


DIGBY, KENELM HENRY.--The Broad Stone of Honour: or, the true Sense and
Practice of Chivalry. The first book, Godefridus. [The second book,
Tancredus, M.D CCC. XXVIII. The third book, Morus, M. DCCC. XXVIII. The
fourth book, Orlandus. M.DCCC.XXIX.]   By Kenelm Henry Digby, Esq.
[vignette]   London, M DCCC. XXIX. [-XXVIII.] Sold by Joseph Booker, . . .
_12mo, four volumes, original boards, uncut edges._


DILKE, LADY EMILIA F. S.--French Painters of the XVIIIth Century   By
Lady Dilke . . . [75 illustrations]   London: George Bell and Sons . . .
[Chiswick Press]   1899. _Imperial 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


DILKE, LADY EMILIA F. S.--French Architects and Sculptors of the XVIIIth
Century   By Lady Dilke . . . [20 illustrations]   London: George Bell
and Sons . . . [Chiswick Press]   1900. _Imperial 8vo, cloth, gilt top,
uncut edges._


DILKE, LADY EMILIA F. S.--French Furniture and Decoration in the XVIIIth
Century   By Lady Dilke . . . [67 illustrations]   London: George Bell
and Sons . . . [Chiswick Press]   1901. _Imperial 8vo, cloth, gilt top,
uncut edges._


DILKE, LADY EMILIA F. S.--French Engravers and Draughtsmen of the
XVIIIth Century   By Lady Dilke . . . London: George Bell and Sons . . .
1902. _Imperial 8vo, gilt top, uncut edges._

Fifty illustrations.


DILLON, JOHN.--Retribution; or, the Chieftain's Daughter. A tragedy, in
five acts. By John Dillon. Performed at the Theatre Royal Covent Garden.
London: printed for Longman, &c . . . 1818. _8vo, morocco, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


DILWORTH, W. H.--The Life of Alexander Pope, Esq; with A View of his
Writings. and Many curious Anecdotes of his noble patrons. As well as of
his Cotemporary Wits, Friends, and Foes. By W. H. Dilworth. London:
Printed for G. Wright, 1759. _12mo, red morocco, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Portrait by Aveline.


DIRCKS, HENRY.--The Life, Times, and Scientific Labours of the second
Marquis of Worcester. To which is added, a reprint of his Century of
Inventions, 1663, with a Commentary thereon, by Henry Dircks, . . .
London: Bernard Quaritch, . . . 1865. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Two steel portraits by J. Cochran, a plan, and numerous woodcuts from
drawings and sketches made, and ciphers and autographs traced, by the
author.


DISRAELI, BENJAMIN.--The Wondrous Tale of Alroy. The Rise of Iskander . . .
London: Saunders and Otley, . . . 1833. _Crown 8vo, three volumes,
calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


DISRAELI, BENJAMIN.--. . . Vivian Grey. London: published for Henry
Colburn . . . Septr. 1833. _12mo, five volumes in four, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

Prefixed to the first volume is the "Key to Vivian Grey . . . London:
printed for William Marsh . . . 1827," with the original covers and two
inserted portraits.


DISRAELI, BENJAMIN.--The Revolutionary Epick. The work of Disraeli the
Younger, author of "The Psychological Romance." London: Edward Moxon, . . .
MDCCCXXXIV. _4to, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First edition. Fifty copies printed.


DISRAELI, BENJAMIN.--The Letters of Runnymede.--London: John Macrone, . . .
MDCCCXXXVI. _Crown 8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

First edition.


DISRAELI, BENJAMIN.--The Tragedy of Count Alarcos. By the author of
"Vivian Grey." London: Henry Colburn, Publisher, . . . [Printed by J. L.
Cox and Sons] . . . 1839. _8vo, red straight-grain morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. A1-A4 and B-H6 in eights, title on A1, two final leaves
of Advertisement, H7 and H8.

Dedication to Lord Francis Egerton, dated London, May, 1839, and signed
"[Greek: Delta]."


DISRAELI, BENJAMIN.--Sybil; or, the Two Nations. By B. Disraeli . . .
London: Henry Colburn . . . 1845. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


DISRAELI, BENJAMIN.--Tancred; or, the New Crusade. By B. Disraeli . . .
London: Henry Colburn . . . 1847. _12mo, three volumes, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition, with portrait inserted.


DISRAELI, BENJAMIN.--Lothair. By the Right Honorable B. Disraeli . . .
London: Longmans, Green, and Co . . . 1870. _Crown 8vo, three volumes,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


DISRAELI, BENJAMIN.--Endymion by the author of Lothair. London:
Longmans, Green, and Co . . . 1880. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, blue
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--An Essay on the Manners and Genius of the Literary
Character. By I. D'Israeli. London: Printed for T. Cadell, Junr. and W.
Davies. 1795. . . . _Crown 8vo, boards, uncut edges._

First edition.


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--Miscellanies; or, Literary Recreations. By I.
D'Israeli. London: printed for T. Cadell and W. Davies. 1796. . . .
_Crown 8vo, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Riviere._

Thick paper copy of the first edition.


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--Romances, [Arabian, Roman, and Arcadian] by I.
D'Israeli. London: Printed for Cadell and Davies, &c . . . 1799. . . .
_Post 8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition, with frontispiece by A. Smith.


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--Flim-Flams! or the life and errors of my Uncle and
his friends with illustrations and obscurities, by Messieurs Tag, Rag,
and Bobtail. A literary romance . . . with eleven plates, a new edition,
with material alterations and additions. London: printed for John
Murray, . . . 1806. _Post 8vo, three volumes, half brown morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Second edition, the eleven plates by Dagley, all coloured.


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--Calamities of Authors; including some inquiries
respecting their moral and literary characters. By the author of
"Curiosities of Literature"   London: printed for John Murray . . .
1812. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back, by Bedford._

First edition.


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--Quarrels of Authors; or, some memoirs for our
literary history, including Specimens of Controversy to the reign of
Elizabeth. By the author of "Calamities of Authors," . . . London:
printed for John Murray . . . 1814. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, calf,
gilt back, by Bedford._

First edition.


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--Quarrels of Authors. 1814. . . . _Crown 8vo, three
volumes, half russia, gilt top, uncut edges._

Another copy. Portrait of D'Israeli by Ridley after Drummond inserted.


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--Curiosities of Literature. Sixth edition . . .
London: John Murray, . . . 1817. _8vo, three volumes, half russia, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--A Second Series of Curiosities of Literature:
consisting of researches in literary, biographical, and political
history; of critical and philosophical inquiries; and of secret history.
By I. D'Israeli . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1823. _8vo, three
volumes, half russia, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--Curiosities of Literature, by I. D'Israeli, Esq., . . .
Illustrated by Bolton Corney, Esq., . . . Second edition, revised and
acuminated. To which are added, Ideas on Controversy: Deduced from the
practice of a Veteran; and adapted to the meanest capacity. London:
Richard Bentley, . . . 1838. _Crown 8vo, red straight-grain morocco,
gilt back, side borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--The Literary Character, illustrated by the history of
Men of Genius, drawn from their own feelings and confessions. By I.
D'Israeli. Third edition, considerably enlarged and improved . . .
London: John Murray . . . 1822. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt
back, by Bedford._


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--Commentaries on the Life and Reign of Charles the
First, King of England. By I. D'Israeli . . . London: Henry Colburn . . .
1828-30-31. _8vo, five volumes, boards, uncut edges._


D'ISRAELI, ISAAC.--Amenities of Literature, consisting of sketches and
characters of English Literature. By I. D'Israeli . . . London: Edward
Moxon, . . . MDCCCXLI. _8vo, three volumes, half blue morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._


DIX, JOHN.--The Life of Thomas Chatterton, including his unpublished
poems and correspondence. By John Dix. London: Hamilton, Adams, & Co.,
. . . MDCCCXXXVII. _8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Large paper copy, with portrait of Chatterton by Woodman after
Branwhite.


DIXON, WILLIAM HEPWORTH.--Spiritual Wives. By William Hepworth Dixon. . . .
[portrait]   London: Hurst and Blackett, . . . 1868. . . . _8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


DOBREE, SAMUEL.--The Book of Death. London: Printed by W. Bulmer and Co
. . . 1819. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

Sixty copies privately printed, with two plates on India paper.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Vignettes in Rhyme and Vers de Societe (now first
collected) by Austin Dobson. Henry S. King & Co . . . London 1873. _Post
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Proverbs in Porcelain and other verses. By Austin
Dobson. Henry S. King & Co., London. 1877. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Proverbs in Porcelain   to which is added "Au
Revoir" a dramatic vignette. By Austin Dobson. London   Kegan Paul,
Trench, Truebner, & Co. . . . 1893. _12mo, cloth, uncut edges._

Twenty-four illustrations.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN, _editor_.--Eighteenth Century Essays Selected and
Annotated by Austin Dobson. London   Kegan Paul, Trench, & Co.
MDCCCLXXXII. _Crown 8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, side borders,
gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with frontispiece on India paper.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Old-World Idylls and other verses   By Austin
Dobson . . . London   Kegan Paul, Trench & Co   M DCCC LXXXIII. _Post
8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Old-World Idylls and other verses by Austin
Dobson. London   Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.   M DCCC LXXXVI. _Foolscap
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Frontispiece.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Old-World Idylls and other verses   By Austin
Dobson   London   Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.   MDCCCLXXXVIII. _Foolscap
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Eighth edition, with a frontispiece by Abbey.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Thomas Bewick and his Pupils by Austin Dobson
with ninety-five illustrations   London   Chatto and Windus, . . . 1884.
_Royal 4to, half vellum, uncut edges._

Special edition. No. 51 of two hundred copies printed for England.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--At the Sign of the Lyre By Austin Dobson   London
   Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.   M DCCCLXXXV. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, gilt
top, uncut edges._

First edition, with a frontispiece by Abbey.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--At the Sign of the Lyre. 1885. _Crown 8vo,
original covers, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with a frontispiece by Abbey.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Life of Oliver Goldsmith by Austin Dobson
London   Walter Scott . . . 1888. _Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._

First edition.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Horace Walpole a memoir with an appendix of books
printed at the Strawberry Hill Press by Austin Dobson with illustrations
by Percy and Leon Moran   New York   Dodd, Mead and Company [De Vinne
Press]   1890. _8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

First edition.

No. 156 of four hundred and twenty-five copies printed on Dickinson
paper.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Horace Walpole. 1890. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

No. 17 of fifty copies printed on Japan paper.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Horace Walpole. 1890. _8vo, red levant morocco,
Janseniste, uncut edges, by R. W. Smith._

One of four copies printed upon vellum, with ten original drawings by
Leon Moran, and a set of the plates, in three states, inserted.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Four Frenchwomen by Austin Dobson with a
frontispiece   London   Chatto & Windus, . . . 1890. _4to, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, side borders, center panel, doubled with blue
figured silk, silk guards, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. No. 29 of fifty large paper copies printed; illustrated
by the insertion of over twenty portraits on Japan and India paper.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--William Hogarth by Austin Dobson . . . London
Sampson Low, Marston and Company . . . 1891. _4to, half brown levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Frontispiece portrait, eleven other photogravures, and
numerous full-page and vignette woodcuts.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--William Hogarth. 1891. _4to, olive levant
morocco, gilt panels on the back, side borders, gilt top, uncut edges,
by The Club Bindery._

Another copy, extra-illustrated by the insertion of one hundred and
three plates after the designs of Hogarth.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--William Hogarth. 1891. _4to, one volume extended
to two, light brown levant morocco, gilt fillets on the back, side
panels, doubled with green silk, gilt borders, silk guards, gilt over
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

No. 36 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed.

Besides the frontispiece portrait, forty-four full-page illustrations,
some on Japan paper, and thirteen vignettes on India paper, one hundred
and ninety plates have been inserted, portraits of Hogarth and
engravings by T. Cook and others after his designs.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--William Hogarth. 1891. _4to, red levant morocco,
gilt back, doubled with green morocco, narrow borders, gilt edges, by
The Club Bindery._

No. 138 of one hundred and fifty copies printed, with proofs of the
plates on India and Japan paper.

Presentation copy from the author.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--The Ballad of Beau Brocade and other Poems of the
XVIII^{th} Century by Austin Dobson with fifty Illustrations by Hugh
Thomson   London   Kegan Paul, Trench, Truebner, & Co.   M DCCC X CII.
_Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 279 of four hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with
full-page illustrations on Japan paper and vignettes on India paper.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Eighteenth Century Vignettes by Austin Dobson . . .
London   Chatto & Windus, . . . 1892. _4to, half vellum, uncut edges._

First edition. No. 120 of two hundred and fifty specially illustrated,
large paper copies printed, with seven plates.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Eighteenth Century Vignettes by Austin Dobson.
Illustrated. New York   Dodd, Mead and Company. 1892. _8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

Large paper copy, two hundred and fifty printed, with fourteen
portraits, etc., on Japan paper.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Eighteenth Century Vignettes   Second Series   By
Austin Dobson . . . London   Chatto & Windus, . . . 1894. _4to, half
vellum, uncut edges._

First edition. No. 24 of two hundred specially illustrated, large paper
copies printed; sixteen illustrations.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--The Story of Rosina and other Verses by Austin
Dobson   Illustrated by Hugh Thomson   London   Kegan Paul, Trench,
Truebner & Co.   M DCCC XCV. _4to, buckram, uncut edges._

No. 28 of two hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with
illustrations on Japan and India paper.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Poems on several occasions by Austin Dobson. New
edition revised and enlarged   With Illustrations. New York: Dodd, Mead
and Company . . . 1895. _8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, quadruple
fillet on back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Japan paper copy, fifty printed, with portrait by W. Strang and etchings
by Lalauze in two states, proofs and unfinished proofs, the latter
signed by the artists.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--A Postscript to Dr. Goldsmith's Retaliation,
being an epitaph on Samuel Johnson, LL.D.   [Oxford, Clarendon Press]
Printed in June, 1896. _4to, half red morocco._

Half-title and three pages of text, at the beginning of which is the
following note:

"[After the Fourth Edition of Doctor Goldsmith's Retaliation was
printed, the Publisher received a supplementary Epitaph on the Wit
and Punster Caleb Whitefoord. Though it is found appended to the later
issues of the Poem, it has been suspected that Whitefoord wrote it
himself. It may be that the following, which has recently come to
light, is another of his forgeries.]"

Mr. Dobson writes in a letter: "I wrote the 'Postscript' in 1896, to be
read at the Johnson dinner at Pembroke College, Oxford. Johnson had not
been treated in Goldsmith's _Retaliation_, and I thought I might add a
'Postscript' like the one which is now appended to that poem, on Caleb
Whitefoord, which many think Whitefoord wrote himself. I printed it in
4to to read, and the Clarendon Press reprinted it in 4to to sell. In
1897 it was reproduced in an annual called _The Pageant_. Then it took
its place in my _Poems_."


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Verses read at the dinner of the Omar Khayyam
Club On Thursday, 25th March, 1897   By Austin Dobson   London   printed
at the Chiswick Press   MDCCCXCVII. _8vo, half red morocco, uncut edges,
with the original covers bound in._

No. 67 of one hundred copies printed for Edmund Gosse in March, 1897, to
be presented to the members of the Omar Khayyam Club as a memento of his
Presidency.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--Carmina Votiva and other Occasional Verses by
Austin Dobson . . . London   printed for private circulation   1901.
_Post 8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt over
uncut edges, with the original covers bound in, by The Club Bindery._

No. 7 of a limited edition.


DOBSON, HENRY AUSTIN.--See Lang, Andrew. The Library.


DODGSON, CHARLES.--Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. By Lewis Carroll.
With forty-two illustrations by John Tenniel. London: Macmillan and Co.
1866. . . . _Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges._

First published edition. A few copies were printed in New York, 1865.


DODINGTON, GEORGE BUBB.--The Diary of the late George Bubb Dodington,
Baron of Melcombe Regis: From March 8, 1749, to February 6, 1761. With
an Appendix containing some curious and interesting papers, Which are
either referred to, or alluded to, in the Diary. A new edition. By Henry
Penruddocke   Wyndham . . . Salisbury: printed and sold by E. Easton: . . .
MDCCLXXXIV. _8vo, half blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Allo._


DODSLEY, ROBERT.--The Oeconomy of Human Life. Translated from an Indian
Manuscript, written by an ancient Bramin. To which is prefixed, An
Account of the Manner in which the said Manuscript was discover'd. In A
Letter from an English Gentleman, now residing in China, to the Earl of
* * * *   London: Printed for M. Cooper, . . . 1751. _Small 8vo, brown
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Ramage. Bound with
GOLDSMITH'S "Bee._"

First edition, with engraved frontispiece.


DODSLEY, ROBERT.--The OEconomy of Human Life. Translated from an
Indian manuscript, written by an ancient Bramin. To which is prefixed an
account of the manner in which the said manuscript was discovered. In a
Letter from an English gentleman now residing in China to the Earl of E
* * * *. London: printed by T. Rickaby, for S. and E. Harding, . . .
1795. _Royal 8vo, calf, gilt back, side panels._

Forty-nine vignettes by Gardiner and others after Harding.

One of twenty-five copies printed upon large paper, with some proof
plates.


DODSLEY, ROBERT.--The OEconomy of Human Life, translated from an
Indian Manuscript, written by an Ancient Bramin [by Robert Dodsley] to
which is prefixed an account of the manner in which the said Manuscript
was discovered. In a Letter from an English Gentleman now residing in
China to the Earl of E. * * * *. London. Printed by T. Rickaby, for E
Harding . . . 1798. _Small 8vo, half brown levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy. In addition to the forty-nine vignettes after the
style of Bartolozzi, with which this book is identified, several other
proof illustrations have been added.


DORAN, JOHN.--New Pictures and Old Panels. By Dr. Doran, . . . London:
Richard Bentley, . . . 1859. _Crown 8vo, half brown levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by V. Krafft._

Portrait of Doran, and fifty-nine inserted portraits and views.


DORAN, JOHN.--"Their Majesties' Servants". Annals of the English Stage
from Thomas Betterton to Edmund Kean by Dr. Doran. F.S.A. Edited and
revised by Robert W. Lowe with fifty copperplate portraits and eighty
wood engravings. London. John C. Nimmo . . . MDCCCLXXXVIII. _Royal 8vo,
three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, three hundred printed, with the portraits in two
states, on Japan and India paper. The plates were intended to develop a
new process of reproduction, but had to be finished by the burin.


DOUCE, FRANCIS.--Illustrations of Shakespeare, and of Ancient Manners:
with Dissertations on the Clowns and Fools of Shakespeare; on the
collection of Popular Tales entitled Gesta Romanorum; and on the English
Morris Dance. By Francis Douce. The Illustrations on Wood by J. Berryman
[and nine plates]   London: Longman . . . MDCCCVII. _8vo, two volumes,
half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


DOUCE, FRANCIS.--See Dance of Death.


DOUGLAS, DAVID.--See Tailfer, Patrick.


DOWSON, ERNEST CHRISTOPHER.--The Pierrot of the Minute   a dramatic
phantasy in one act Written by Ernest Dowson   With a Frontispiece,
Initial Letter, Vignette, and Cul-de-lampe by Aubrey Beardsley   London
   Leonard Smithers . . . MDCCCXCVII. _Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt top._

One of three hundred copies printed.


DOYLE, SIR ARTHUR CONAN.--The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes. By A. Conan
Doyle. [Illustrated]   London: George Newnes, . . . 1892. . . . _8vo,
original cloth, gilt edges._

First edition.


D'OYLY, SIR CHARLES.--Tom Raw, the Griffin: a Burlesque Poem, in twelve
cantos: illustrated by twenty-five engravings, descriptive of the
Adventures of a Cadet in the East India Company's service . . . by a
Civilian and an Officer of the Bengal establishment   London: printed
for R. Ackermann . . . M.DCCC.XXVIII. _Royal 8vo, red levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Amand._

The twenty-five plates, coloured, are somewhat in the manner of
Rowlandson.


DRAKE, JOSEPH RODMAN.--The Culprit Fay and other poems. By Joseph Rodman
Drake. New York: George Dearborn, . . . 1835. _8vo, blue levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Portrait, frontispiece-title, three inserted plates and
two vignettes, proofs on India paper.


DRAKE AND HALLECK.--The Croakers, by Joseph Rodman Drake and Fitz-Greene
Halleck. First Complete Edition. New York   MDCCCLX. _Royal 8vo, blue
morocco, back and sides in gilt tools and mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Pawson and Nicholson._

Portraits of the authors, and (inserted) an autograph letter from
Halleck and forty-one portraits and views of New York.

No. 2 of the Bradford Club publications, and No. 127 of one hundred and
fifty subscriber's copies printed.


DRAKE AND HALLECK.--The Croakers. 1860. _Royal 8vo, green levant
morocco, gilt fillets, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

No. 7 of one hundred Club copies printed, extra-illustrated by the
insertion of sixty-six plates, including portraits and early views of
New York, many in proof state.


DRAKE, JOSEPH RODMAN.--See Halleck, Fitz-Greene.


DRAKE, NATHAN.--Essays, biographical, critical, and historical,
illustrative of the Tatler, Spectator, and Guardian. By Nathan Drake,
M.D. . . . London: printed by C. Whittingham, . . . for John Sharpe, . . .
1805. _Post 8vo, three volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, with three portraits in Volume I, by P. W. Tomkins, F.
Bartolozzi, and N. Schiavonetti after H. Thomson, J. Richardson, and
Kneller; and twelve portraits in Volume III after Kneller, Woolaston,
Zinck and five others. In Volume II are two inserted views.

The portraits in the eight volumes of "The Spectator" (see BRITISH
CLASSICS) were designed to illustrate the present work, in which are
pages of references.


DRAKE, NATHAN.--Essays, biographical, critical, and historical,
illustrative of the Rambler, Adventurer, & Idler, and of the various
periodical papers which, In Imitation of the Writings of Steele and
Addison, have been published Between the Close of the eighth volume of
the Spectator, and the commencement of the year 1809. By Nathan Drake,
M.D. . . . Printed by J. Seeley, Buckingham, for W. Suttaby, . . .
London. 1809. [-1810.] _Post 8vo, two volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, with a view and a portrait of Warton by N.
Schiavonetti after Reynolds.


DRAKE, NATHAN.--Evenings in Autumn; a Series of Essays, narrative and
miscellaneous. By Nathan Drake . . . London: printed for Longman . . .
1822. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, half citron levant morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._


DRAKE, NATHAN.--Noontide Leisure; or, Sketches in Summer, outlines from
nature and imagination, and including a Tale of the Days of Shakespeare.
By Nathan Drake . . . London: printed for T. Cadell . . . 1824. _Crown
8vo, two volumes, half citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges._


DRAKE, NATHAN.--Mornings in Spring; or retrospections, biographical,
critical, and historical. By Nathan Drake . . . London: John Murray . . .
MDCCCXXVIII. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, half citron levant morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges._


DRAMATISTS.--English Comic Dramatists edited by Oswald Crawfurd   London
   Kegan Paul Trench & Co., MDCCCLXXXIII. _Crown 8vo, red levant morocco,
blind-tooled back and side corners, gilt top, uncut edges, by Alfred
Matthews._

No. 49 of fifty large paper copies printed, illustrated by the insertion
of two sepia drawings and nine portraits, some proofs and some on India
paper.


DRURY, DREW.--Illustrations of Natural History. Wherein are exhibited
Upwards of Two Hundred and Forty Figures of Exotic Insects, According to
their different Genera; Very few of which have hitherto been figured by
any Author, Being engraved and coloured from Nature, with the greatest
Accuracy, and under the Author's own Inspection, On Fifty Copper-Plates.
With a particular Description of each Insect: Interspersed with Remarks
and Reflections on the Nature and Properties of many of them. By D.
Drury. To which is added A Translation into French . . . London: Printed
for the Author, And sold by B. White, . . . 1770-1773-1782. _4to, three
volumes, half brown levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges,
by David._

The title, as above, refers chiefly to the first volume: the second
volume contains 220 figures on 50 plates and the third, 200 figures on
50 plates; in all, 660 figures on 150 plates.


DU BOIS, EDWARD, _translator_.--The Wreath; composed of selections from
Sappho, Theocritus, Bion, and Moschus. Accompanied by a prose
translation, with notes. To which are added Remarks on Shakespeare, &c
and a comparison between Horace and Lucian. By Edward Du Bois . . .
London: printed by T. Bensley . . . 1799. _Royal 8vo, half green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Large paper copy, with a frontispiece and thirty-two inserted plates,
proofs on India paper and before letters, some in two states.


DU BOIS, EDWARD.--My Pocket Book; or, Hints for "A Ryghte Merrie and
Conceitede" Tour, in quarto; To be called "The Stranger in Ireland", In
1805. By a Knight Errant. . . . A new edition. In which will be found,
amongst other pleasant and satirical Novelties, An Introduction; A
Description of the Plates; Illustrative Anecdotes from my "Tour through
Holland" in 1806; an Appendix, containing three MSS. found in St.
Patrick's Abbey; and An Essay in Defence of bad Spelling. London:
printed for Vernor, Hood, and Sharpe, &c . . . 1808. _12mo, Scotch plaid
silk, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Fourth edition, with five tinted plates.


DU BOIS, HENRI PENE.--American Book bindings in the Library of Henry
William Poor Described by Henri Pene du Bois   Illustrated in Gold-leaf
and Colors by Edward Bierstadt   Printed at the Marion Press   Jamaica
. . . 1903. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 15 of thirty-five copies printed on Imperial Japan paper.


DUEL.--The Duel; a Poem: Inscribed to the Right-Honourable W---- P----y
Esq; . . . London: Printed for A. Moore, . . . and sold by A. Dodd, . . .
E. Nutt, . . . and J. Joliffe, . . . [n.d.]   _Folio, red levant
morocco, by The Club Bindery. Bound with ten other works._


DUER, WILLIAM A.--Reminiscences of an Old Yorker. By the late William A.
Duer, LL.D., President of Columbia College, etc. New York: printed for
W. L. Andrews, 1867. _4to, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 27 of thirty-five copies printed.


DUFF, EDWARD GORDON.--Early Printed Books by E. Gordon Duff, London:
Kegan Paul, Trench, Truebner & Co., . . . MDCCCXCIII. _8vo, half vellum,
uncut edges._

No. 15 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed: with woodcut
title and eleven facsimile plates on Japan paper.


DUFF, PLOMER, AND PROCTOR.--Handlists of English Printers 1501-1556.
Part I. By E. Gordon Duff. [Part II. by E. Gordon Duff, H. R. Plomer and
R. Proctor.]   London: printed by Blades, East & Blades, for the
Bibliographical Society, September, 1895. [-December, 1896.] _4to, two
volumes, original paper covers, uncut edges._

Part I treats of Wynkyn de Worde, Julian Notary, R. & W. Faques, and
John Skot; Part II, of R. Pynson, R. Copland, J. Rastell, P. Treveris,
R. Bankes, L. Andrewe, W. Rastell, T. Godfray, and J. Byddell.


DUFF, EDWARD GORDON.--William Caxton by E. Gordon Duff, M. A. . . .
Chicago   The Caxton Club   M C M V. _4to, half cloth, uncut edges._

One of two hundred and fifty-two copies printed on American hand-made
paper, with twenty-five illustrations.


DUFIEF, NICOLAS GOUIN.--. . . Nature Displayed in her mode of Teaching
Language to Man; being a new and infallible Method of acquiring
Languages with unparalleled rapidity; deduced from the analysis of the
human mind, and consequently suited to every capacity: adapted to the
French by N. G. Dufief . . . The ninth edition. London: printed for the
author, . . . 1828. _8vo, two volumes, ivory levant, richly decorated on
back and sides with flowers and leaf spray, and the arms of Charles X on
both covers, wide inside borders with shield in corners, silk linings,
gilt over uncut edges, by C. Lewis._

Special copy printed and bound for presentation to Charles X of France,
with India proof portrait of the author engraved by Edwin inserted, the
presentation inscription, and facsimiles on silk, etc.


DUFRESNOY, CHARLES ALPHONSE.--The Art of Painting of Charles Alphonse du
Fresnoy. Translated into English Verse by William Mason, M. A. With
Annotations by Sir Joshua Reynolds . . . York: Printed by A. Ward . . .
M. DCC.LXXXIII. _4to, old green morocco, with the arms of Horace
Walpole on each cover, gilt edges._

Horace Walpole's copy with notes in his handwriting. He has also added
portraits of Dryden, Pope, Gray, Mason, and Reynolds, a view of
Strawberry Hill, and his book-plate.


DUNLAP, WILLIAM.--History of the Rise and Progress of the Arts of Design
in the United States. By William Dunlap . . . New York: George P. Scott
and Co. . . . 1834. _8vo, two volumes, boards, uncut edges._


DUNLAP, WILLIAM.--Thirty Years Ago; or the Memoirs of a Water Drinker.
By the Author of Memoirs of George Frederick Cooke, &c . . . New York:
published by Bancroft & Holley, . . . 1836. _Crown 8vo, two volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._


DUNLOP, JOHN.--The History of Fiction: being a critical account of the
most celebrated Prose Works of Fiction, from the earliest Greek Romances
to the Novels of the present age. By John Dunlop. Edinburgh: Printed by
James Ballantyne and Co. . . . 1814. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, half red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Pratt._

First edition.


DUNLOP, JOHN.--The History of Fiction: being a critical account of the
most celebrated prose works of fiction, from the earliest Greek romances
to the novels of the present age. By John Dunlop . . . Second edition.
Edinburgh: Printed by James Ballantyne and Co. for Longman, Hurst, Rees,
. . . 1816. _Post 8vo, three volumes, half brown levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._


DUNLOP, JOHN.--History of Roman Literature from its earliest period to
the Augustan Age . . . By John Dunlop . . . Second edition. London:
printed for Longman . . . 1824. [-1828] _8vo, three volumes, half maroon
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


DUNTON, JOHN.--The Life and Errors of John Dunton, citizen of London;
with the lives and characters of more than a thousand contemporary
divines, and other persons of literary eminence. To which are added,
Dunton's conversation in Ireland; Selections from his other genuine
works; and a faithful portrait of the author . . . Printed by and for J.
Nichols, Son, and Bentley . . . London   1818. _8vo, two volumes, half
calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


DUNTON, JOHN.--See Harley Pamphlets.


DUPPA, RICHARD.--The Life of Michel Angelo Buonarroti, with his Poetry
and Letters. By R. Duppa, . . . Second Edition. London: printed for John
Murray, &c . . . M. DCCC. VII. _Royal 4to, half red morocco, uncut
edges._

Portrait by F. Bartolozzi, and forty-nine plates, six of them double and
one folded.


DUPPA AND DE QUINCY.--. . . Michel Angelo, by R. Duppa, L.L.B.
Raffaello, by Quatremere de Quincy . . . London: David Bogue, . . .
MDCCCXLVI. _8vo, half cloth, uncut edges._

The second biography was translated by William Hazlitt. A medallion
portrait of Michael Angelo is prefixed to the volume.


DURAND, JOHN.--The Life and Times of A. B. Durand by John Durand With
illustrations   New York   Charles Scribner's Sons   1894. _4to,
buckram, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait of Taine, to whom the work is dedicated, and fifteen other
illustrations.


DUeRER, ALBRECHT.--The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ pourtrayed by
Albert Durer. Edited by Henry Cole . . . London: Joseph Cundall . . .
[printed by C. Whittingham at the Chiswick Press]   1844. _Small 4to,
brown morocco, back and sides covered with blind tooling adapted from a
German binding of the XVth century, gilt edges, by Clarke and Bedford._

Thirty-seven illustrations in facsimile of Duerer's "Small Passion."

With the exception of two subjects, this work is taken from the
thirty-seven original blocks drawn upon by Duerer for the engraver.


DUeRER, ALBRECHT.--The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1844. _8vo, red
velvet, overlapped and doubled with silk, the sides decorated with brass
ornaments, center showing the monogram of Duerer, clasp, gilt edges._

Printed entirely on vellum.


DUSIMITIER, PIERRE EUGENE.--Portraits of the Generals, Ministers,
Magistrates, Members of Congress, and others, Who have rendered
themselves Illustrious in the Revolution of the United States of North
America. Drawn from the life, By M. Dusimitier, Painter, And Member of
the Philosophical Society of Philadelphia. and engraved by the most
eminent artists in London. London: Published by R. Wilkinson, . . . and
J. Debrett, . . . MDCCLXXXIII. _4to, half russia, gilt back._

Twelve portraits, brilliant original impressions, engraved by B. B. E.,
and the original cover on which the continuation of the series was
announced.


DWIGHT, TIMOTHY.--The Conquest of Canaean; a poem, in Eleven Books. By
Timothy Dwight . . . Hartford: Printed by Elisha Babcock. M.DCC.LXXXV.
_12mo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Portrait of the author by Leney after Trumbull.


DYCE, ALEXANDER, _editor_.--Specimens of British Poetesses; selected and
chronologically arranged, by the Rev. Alexander Dyce. London: T. Rodd,
. . . 1825. _Crown 8vo, half brown morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges._


DYCE, ALEXANDER.--Remarks on Mr. J. P. Collier's and Mr. C. Knight's
editions of Shakespeare. By the Rev. Alexander Dyce. . . . London:
Edward Moxon, . . . M DCCC XLIV. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


DYCE, ALEXANDER.--See Sonnets.


DYER, CHARLES GEORGE.--Biographical Sketches of the Lives and Characters
of illustrious and eminent Men. By Charles George Dyer. Illustrated with
whole length portraits. . . . London: published by C. G. Dyer, &c . . .
1819. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

Forty-eight plates by J. Romney and T. Priscott after Reynolds,
Bartolozzi, Zoffany, Vandyke, Vertue, and others.


DYER, JOHN.--The Fleece: a poem. In four books. By John Dyer, LL.B.
[vignette]   London: Printed for R. and J. Dodsley, in Pall-Mall. M.
DCC. LVII. _4to, blue levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


EASTLAKE, SIR CHARLES LOCK.--Materials for a History of Oil Painting. By
Charles Lock Eastlake . . . London: printed for Longman, . . . 1847.
[-1869] _8vo, two volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._


EASTLAKE, SIR CHARLES LOCK.--A History of the Gothic Revival   An
attempt to show how the taste for mediaeval architecture which lingered
in England during the two last centuries has since been encouraged and
developed by Charles L. Eastlake . . . London   Longmans, Green, and Co.
. . . 1872. _8vo, cloth, gilt top._

Thirty-six full-page woodcuts, and twelve illustrations in the text.


EASTLAKE, SIR CHARLES LOCK.--See Kugler, Franz Theodor.


EASTLAKE, LADY, _editor_.--Life of John Gibson, R. A. Sculptor. Edited
by Lady Eastlake. London: Longmans, Green, and Co.   1870. _8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

Portrait of Gibson engraved by Adlard.


EATON, CHARLOTTE A.--Rome, in the nineteenth century; . . . By Charlotte
A. Eaton. Fifth edition. To which is now first added a complete index,
and thirty-four engraved illustrations. . . . London: Henry G. Bohn, . . .
1852. _Post 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


EBSWORTH, J. W.--Cavalier Lyrics: 'for church and crown'. By J. W.
Ebsworth, . . . London and Hertford: Stephen Austin and Sons: now first
imprinted, for private circulation. 1887. _8vo, paper, uncut edges._

No. 51 of one hundred and fifty copies printed; with woodcut
frontispiece.


EDGEWORTH, MARIA.--Tales and Novels by Maria Edgeworth. London: printed
for Baldwin and Cradock: . . . 1832. _Post 8vo, eighteen volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

Frontispieces and special engraved titles for each volume.


EDWARDS, CHARLES LINCOLN.--Bahama Songs and Stories   A contribution to
folk-lore by Charles L. Edwards, . . . [4 illustrations]   Boston and
New York   Published for The American Folk-Lore Society by Houghton,
Mifflin and Company . . . 1895. _8vo, cloth, gilt top._


EDWARDS, EDWARD.--Memoirs of Libraries; Including a Hand Book of Library
Economy. By Edward Edwards. London: Truebner & Co. 1859. _8vo, two
volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by F.
Bedford._

Large paper copy, with numerous illustrations.


EDWARDS, EDWARD.--Libraries and Founders of Libraries. By Edward
Edwards. London: Truebner and Co.   1865. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by F. Bedford._

Large paper copy, thirty printed.


EDWARDS, EDWARD.--The Life of Sir Walter Raleigh based on contemporary
documents preserved in the Rolls House, the Privy Council Office,
Hatfield House, the British Museum, and other manuscript repositories,
British and foreign. Together with his letters: now first collected. By
Edward Edwards. . . . Macmillan and Co. 1868. . . . _8vo, two volumes,
half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait by C. H. Jeens after Francis Zucchero, armorial bearings,
genealogical table, and two facsimiles.


EFFIGIES POETICAE.--See Proctor, B. W.


EGAN, PIERCE.--Life in London; or, the Day and Night Scenes of Jerry
Hawthorn, Esq. and his elegant Corinthian Tom, accompanied by Bob Logic,
the Oxonian, in their Rambles and Sprees through the Metropolis. By
Pierce Egan, . . . Dedicated to His most Gracious Majesty King George
the Fourth. [woodcut]   Embellished with thirty-six [coloured] scenes
from real life, designed and etched by I. R. & G. Cruikshank; And
enriched also with numerous original Designs on Wood, by the same
Artists. London: printed for Sherwood, Neely, and Jones, . . . 1821.
_Royal 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, with
the original covers bound in, by Riviere._

First edition.


EGLESFIELD, FRANCIS.--Monarchy Revived; being the Personal History of
Charles the Second, from his earliest years to his restoration to the
throne. Reprinted from the edition of 1661. With fourteen portraits.
London: printed for Charles Baldwyn . . . MDCCCXXII. _Royal 8vo, red
calf, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Large paper copy. The portraits, engraved by R. Cooper, are proofs on
India paper.


ELIOT, GEORGE.--Scenes of Clerical Life by George Eliot . . . William
Blackwood and Sons   Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLVIII. _8vo, two volumes,
calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


ELIOT, GEORGE.--Adam Bede by George Eliot   William Blackwood and Sons
Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLIX. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, calf, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


ELIOT, GEORGE.--The Mill on the Floss by George Eliot   William
Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh . . . MD CCC LX. _Crown 8vo, three
volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


ELIOT, GEORGE.--Silas Marner: the Weaver of Raveloe by George Eliot
William Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLXI. _8vo, calf, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


ELIOT, GEORGE.--Romola by George Eliot   London: Smith, Elder and Co.
MDCCCLXIII. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


ELIOT, GEORGE.--Romola by George Eliot with illustrations by Sir
Frederick Leighton, . . . London. Smith, Elder, and Co., . . . 1880.
_Imperial 8vo, two volumes, buckram, uncut edges._

No. 752 of one thousand copies printed, with twenty-four plates and
numerous vignettes on India paper.


ELIOT, GEORGE.--Felix Holt the Radical by George Eliot   William
Blackwood and Sons   Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLXVI. _Crown 8vo, three
volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


ELIOT, GEORGE.--The Spanish Gypsy, a Poem, by George Eliot. William
Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLXVIII. _8vo, calf, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


ELIOT, GEORGE.--Middlemarch; a Study of Provincial Life by George Eliot
   William Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLXXI-II. _Crown 8vo,
four volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


ELIOT, GEORGE.--The Legend of Jubal and other Poems by George Eliot
William Blackwood and Sons   Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLXXIV. _Post 8vo,
calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


ELIOT, GEORGE.--Daniel Deronda by George Eliot. A new edition . . .
William Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLXXVI. _Crown 8vo, four
volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._


ELIOT, GEORGE.--Impressions of Theophrastus Such by George Eliot
William Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLXXIX. _Crown 8vo,
calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


ELIOT, GEORGE.--George Eliot's Life as related in her Letters and
Journals. Arranged and edited by her husband J. W. Cross   William
Blackwood and Sons   Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLXXXV. _Post 8vo, three
volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Three portraits, proofs on India paper, and eight woodcut
illustrations.


ELLIOTT, GRACE DALRYMPLE.--Journal of my Life during the French
Revolution. By Grace Dalrymple Elliott. London: Richard Bentley, . . .
1859. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Three portraits after Cosway, Sir Joshua Reynolds, etc.


ELLIS, EDWIN J.--Fate in Arcadia and other poems by Edwin J. Ellis with
[33] illustrations by the Author   London   1892. Ward & Downey. . . .
_Imperial 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


ELLIS, GEORGE.--History of the Late Revolution in the Dutch Republic
London, printed for Edwards . . . 1789. _4to, red morocco, gilt back,
silk linings, by H. Walther, with his ticket._

Large paper copy.


ELLIS, HENRY.--Original Letters illustrative of English History;
including numerous royal letters: from autographs in the British Museum,
and one or two other collections. With notes and illustrations by Henry
Ellis, . . . London   printed for Harding, Triphook, and Lepard.
MDCCCXXV. [-MDCCCXLVI.] _Crown 8vo, eleven volumes, half brown morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

The three volumes of the First Series are dated 1825, "second edition;"
the four volumes of the Second Series, "printed for Harding and Lepard,"
1827; the four volumes of the Third Series, published by Richard
Bentley, 1846. Six portraits by G. Thomson, T. A. Dean, B. Holl, J.
Cooke, and S. Freeman after H. Corbould, Nicholas Hilliard, and T.
Wageman.


ELMES, JAMES.--The Arts and Artists, or Anecdotes and Relics of the
Schools of Painting, Sculpture, & Architecture, by James Elmes
[vignette]   London: John Knight & Henry Lacy . . . MDCCCXXV. _Post 8vo,
three volumes, half blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Allo._

Engraved title-pages, fourteen portraits, and two plates of autographs
in facsimile.


ELMES, JAMES.--Sir Christopher Wren and his times. With illustrative
sketches and anecdotes of the Most distinguished Personages in the
seventeenth century. By James Elmes . . . London:--Chapman & Hall, . . .
MDCCCLII. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Steel portrait of Wren.


ELTON, CHARLES ISAAC, AND MARY AUGUSTA.--The Great Book-Collectors . . .
London   Kegan Paul, &c . . . MDCCCXCIII. _8vo, half vellum, uncut
edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred and fifty printed, with ten illustrations.


ELWOOD, ANNE KATHARINE.--Memoirs of the Literary Ladies of England, from
the commencement of the last century. By Mrs. Elwood . . . London: Henry
Colburn . . . 1843. _12mo, two volumes, half citron levant morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges._

Two portraits.


ELZE, KARL.--Lord Byron a biography with a critical essay on his place
in literature   By Karl Elze translated with the author's sanction, and
edited with notes   With Portrait and Facsimile. London. John Murray, . . .
1872. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


EMBLEMS OF MORTALITY; representing, in upwards of fifty cuts, Death
seizing all ranks and degrees of people; Imitated from a Painting in the
Cemetery of the Dominican Church at Basil, in Switzerland: With an
Apostrophe to each, translated from the Latin and French. Intended as
well for the Information of the Curious, as the Instruction and
Entertainment of Youth. To which is prefixed A copious Preface,
containing an historical Account of the above, and other Paintings on
this Subject, now or lately existing in divers Parts of Europe.
London: Printed for T. Hodgson, . . . M DCC LXXXIX. _12mo, blue
straight-grain morocco, gilt back and side corners in the manner of
Roger Payne, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First edition. Woodcut frontispiece and fifty-one cuts of Holbein's
Dance of Death, modernized and engraved by Bewick. After the third
edition, the blocks were destroyed by fire.


EMBLEMS, for the Entertainment and Improvement of Youth: containing
Hieroglyphical and Enigmatical Devices, relating to all Parts and
Stations of Life; together with Explanations and Proverbs, in French,
Spanish, Italian, and Latin, alluding to them, and Translated into
English: The Whole curiously Engrav'd on 62 Copper Plates. Sold by R.
Ware . . . [n.d.] _8vo, old blue calf, gilt back, side borders, panels
blind-tooled in diamonds._

Frontispiece, "Delectando Moneo," engraved title, and 62 plates, each in
15 compartments. Plates xli and xlviii are transposed, but not the text.


EMERSON, RALPH WALDO.--Nature . . . Boston: James Munroe and Company.
MDCCCXXXVI. _12mo, original cloth._

First edition, with autograph letter of the author inserted.


EMERSON, RALPH WALDO.--(I.) Essays: by R. W. Emerson. Boston: James
Munroe and Company. MDCCCXLI. (II.) Essays: second series. By R. W.
Emerson. Boston: James Munroe and Company. MDCCCXLIV. _12mo and 16mo,
two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over untrimmed edges,
by David._

First edition of both series.


EMERSON, RALPH WALDO.--Poems. By R. W. Emerson. Boston: James Munroe and
Company. 1847. _16mo, green levant morocco, back and sides covered with
trefoil and star ornaments, gilt over uncut edges, by the Doves Bindery.
1894._

First edition.


EMERSON, RALPH WALDO.--Poems by Ralph Waldo Emerson. London: Chapman,
Brothers, . . . M.DCCC.XLVII. _12mo, citron levant morocco, Janseniste,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Alfred Matthews._

English copyright edition.


EMERSON, RALPH WALDO.--Representative Men: seven lectures. By R. W.
Emerson. Boston: Phillips, Sampson and Company, . . . 1850. _12mo,
maroon morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Stikeman._

First edition.


EMERSON, RALPH WALDO.--Miscellanies; embracing Nature, Addresses, and
Lectures. By R. W. Emerson. Boston: Phillips, Sampson, and Company.
M.DCCC.LVI. _12mo, red morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Stikeman._

First edition.


EMERSON, RALPH WALDO.--English Traits. By R. W. Emerson. Boston:
Phillips, Sampson, and Company. 1856. _12mo, green morocco, gilt back
and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Stikeman._

First edition.


EMERSON, RALPH WALDO.--The Conduct of Life. By R. W. Emerson. Boston:
Ticknor and Fields. M DCCC LX. _12mo, original cloth._

First edition.


EMERSON, RALPH WALDO.--Society and Solitude. Twelve Chapters. By Ralph
Waldo Emerson. Boston: Fields, Osgood, & Co. 1870. _12mo, original
cloth._

First edition.


EMERSON, RALPH WALDO.--Letters and Social Aims. By Ralph Waldo Emerson.
Boston: James R. Osgood and Company, . . . 1876. _12mo, original cloth._

First edition.


EMERSON, RALPH WALDO.--See Carlyle and Emerson.


ENGINEERS.--Personal Recollections of English Engineers, and of the
introduction of the railway system into the United Kingdom. By a Civil
Engineer, author of the "Trinity of Italy." London: Hodder and
Stoughton, . . . M DCCCLXVIII. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


ENGLISH DRAMA.--The New English Drama, [113 Comedies, Tragedies, Operas,
Farces, and Melodramas] with prefatory remarks, biographical sketches,
and notes, Critical and Explanatory; Being the only Edition existing
which is faithfully marked with the stage business and stage directions,
As Performed At the Theatres Royal. Edited By W. Oxberry, Comedian. . . .
London. Published for the Proprietors by W. Simpkin and R. Marshall, . . .
C. Chapple, . . . and sold by W. and J. Lowndes, . . . 1818. [-1824]
_12mo, twenty-two volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Pratt._

Large paper copy, with portraits of celebrated players.


ENGLISH LYRICS   London   Kegan Paul, Trench & Co., . . . MDCCCLXXXIII.
_Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed.


ENGLISH ODES   selected by Edmund W. Gosse   London   C. Kegan Paul &
Co., . . . MDCCCLXXXI. _Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with a frontispiece on India paper.


ENGLISH POETS.--Passages from Modern English Poets. Illustrated by the
Junior Etching Club. Forty-seven etchings. [by Tenniel, Whistler,
Millais, &c.] London: published by Day & Son, . . . [1862] _4to, cloth,
gilt edges._


ENGRAVINGS.--India Proofs from the Annuals. Literary Souvenir, &c.
Seventy five plates after Corbould, Westall, Smirke, Stephanoff, Leslie,
&c.   London   1827. _Folio, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by R. W. Smith._


EPICTETUS.--The Works of Epictetus. Consisting of his Discourses, in
four books, the Enchiridion, and Fragments. A translation from the Greek
based on that of Elizabeth Carter, by Thomas Wentworth Higginson.
Boston: Little, Brown, and Company. [University Press] 1866. _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

One of seventy-five large paper copies printed.


EPICTETUS   [Reprinted from the translation of George Long] London
Arthur L. Humphreys   1897. _4to, two volumes, original paper wrappers,
uncut edges._


ERASMUS, DESIDERIUS.--Proverbs, chiefly taken from the Adagia of
Erasmus, with explanations; and further illustrated by corresponding
examples from the Spanish, Italian, French & English Languages. By
Robert Bland . . . London: printed for T. Egerton . . . 1814. _Crown
8vo, two volumes in one, blue morocco, back and sides richly gilded,
embossed gilt edges, by J. Wright._


ESTCOURT, RICHARD.--The Fair Example: or the Modish Citizens. a
Comedy. As it was Acted at the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane. By Mr.
Estcourt. [One line in Latin, four in English]   London, Printed for
Bernard Lintott . . . 1706. Price 1s. 6d. _4to, blue calf, gilt back,
gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A-K in fours, title on A1, A2 misprinted H2. Dedicated to
Christopher Rich, Chief Patentee, Governor and Manager of the Theatre
Royal.


EVANS, ABEL.--Vertumnus. an Epistle to Mr. Jacob Bobart, Botany
Professor to the University of Oxford, and Keeper of the
Physick-Garden. By the Author of The Apparition. [Two lines from
Virgil]   Oxford: Printed by L. L. for Stephen Fletcher Book-seller:
. . . 1713. _8vo, red straight-grain morocco, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Engraved frontispiece of a triumphal arch erected to King Charles and
the Earl of Danby, celebrated in the poem (page 21) as the generous
patron who planted while Bobart tilled.

Title and A-D in fours.


EVANS, JOHN.--The Progress of Human Life: Shakspeare's Seven Ages of
Man; illustrated by a series of extracts in prose and poetry. . . . By
John Evans, . . . Second Edition. [cut]   Chiswick: Printed by Charles
Whittingham; . . . 1823. _Crown 8vo, half cloth, uncut edges._


EVELYN, ALEXANDER JOHN.--English Alice, a poem in five cantos, by
Alexander John Evelyn, Esq. London: William Pickering. 1852. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


EVERETT, EDWARD.--The Life of George Washington. By Edward Everett. New
York: Sheldon and Company . . . 1860. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


[EYTON, JOSEPH WALTER KING.]--Catalogue of the Library of Joseph Walter
King Eyton . . . London   1848. _4to, blue levant morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with coloured frontispiece and seven
book-plates of the owner, a facsimile of one of Roger Payne's remarkable
bills for binding, and India proof impressions of portraits of Bishop
Andrews, Thomas Frognall Dibdin, and Thomas Sharpe.


FACETIAE: being a general Collection of the Jeux d'Esprits which have
been illustrated by Robert Cruikshank . . . containing nearly sixty
engravings. London: William King . . . M.DCCC.XXXI. _12mo, two volumes,
brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Rousselle._

Some of the thirteen separate titles bear the date 1830. The series
includes "The Devil's Walk," by Coleridge and Southey; "The Real Devil's
Walk"; "The High-Mettled Racer," by Charles Dibdin; and "Monsieur
Tonson," by John Taylor.


FACTION.--An Essay on Faction . . . London, Printed for J. Peele . . .
MDCCXXXII. _Folio, red levant morocco, by The Club Bindery. Bound with
ten other works._


FAGAN, LOUIS.--The Life of Sir Anthony Panizzi, K. C. B., late Principal
Librarian of the British Museum, Senator of Italy, &. &c. by Louis
Fagan, . . . With an Etching and other Illustrations by the Author. . . .
London: Remington & Co., . . . 1880. . . . _8vo, two volumes, half
green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._


FAGAN, LOUIS.-- . . . The Art of Michel' Angelo Buonarroti as
Illustrated by the various Collections in the British Museum. By Louis
Fagan. . . . With [18] illustrations and a frontispiece [portrait] by
the author. London: Dulau & Co., . . . M. DCCC. LXXXIII. _Royal 8vo,
half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


FAGAN, LOUIS.--Collectors' Marks by Louis Fagan . . . With Frontispiece
[etched portrait of Thomas Earl of Arundel] by the Author. London: Field
& Tuer . . . 1883. _Square 8vo, vellum, uncut edges._

Twenty-eight plates of "Collectors' Marks."


FAGAN, LOUIS.--A Descriptive Catalogue of the Engraved Works of William
Faithorne, by Louis Fagan, . . . 1888. Bernard Quaritch [Gutenberg
Presse] . . . London. _Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


FAIRHOLT, FREDERICK W.--An Illustrated Descriptive Catalogue of the
collection of Antique Silver Plate formed by Albert, Lord Londesborough;
now the property of Lord Londesborough. By Frederick W. Fairholt, . . .
Printed for private reference, by T. Richards, . . . M.DCCCLX. _4to,
cloth._

Twenty steel plates and several woodcut illustrations.


FAIRHOLT, FREDERICK W.--See Irving and Fairholt.


FAIR SUICIDE.--The Fair Suicide: being an Epistle from a Young Lady to
the Person who was the Cause of her Death. London, Printed for Richard
Wellington . . . MDCCXXXIII. _Folio, red levant morocco, by The Club
Bindery. Bound with ten other works._


FAIRY FEAST.--The Fairy Feast, Written by the Author of A Tale of a Tub,
and the Mully of Mountown. London: Printed in the year, 1704. _Folio,
cloth, by The Club Bindery._

These two poems are not found among Swift's Poetical Works, 1833,
although written "by the Author of A Tale of a Tub."


FALCONER, WILLIAM.--The Shipwreck, a poem by William Falconer a Sailor:
. . . The text illustrated by additional notes, and corrected from the
first and second editions, with a life of the author, by James Stanier
Clarke, . . . London. Printed for William Miller, . . . By T. Bensley,
. . . 1804. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._


FALCONER, WILLIAM.--The Shipwreck, a poem, by William Falconer, a
Sailor: . . . the text illustrated by additional notes, and corrected
from the first and second editions; with a Life of the Author, by J. S.
Clarke, . . . London: printed for William Miller, . . . 1811. _8vo,
Etruscan calf, gilt back, gilt edges, with painting of a landscape under
the gilding._

Four full-page plates and six vignettes by James Fittler after Nicholas
Pocock.


FALCONER, WILLIAM.--The Poetical Works of William Falconer [with a
Memoir by the Rev. John Mitford.]   London.   William Pickering   1836.
_Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


FALK, VON MUeLLER, AND OTHERS.--Characteristics of Goethe, From the
German of Falk, von Mueller, &c. With notes, original and translated,
illustrative of German literature, by Sarah Austin. . . . London:
published by Effingham Wilson, . . . 1833. _Crown 8vo, three volumes,
half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Portrait on India paper, and two other frontispieces.


FANE, JULIAN.--Poems by the Hon. Julian Fane   London   William
Pickering   1852. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


FANSHAWE, CATHERINE MARIA.--Memorials of Miss Catherine Maria Fanshawe.
[Edited by W. Harness.]   Privately Printed. [London, 1865]   _Royal
4to, half brown morocco, gilt top._


FARMER AND HENLEY, _editors_.--Slang and its Analogues Past and Present.
A Dictionary, Historical and Comparative, of the Heterodox Speech of all
Classes of Society for more than Three Hundred Years. With synonyms in
English, French, German, Italian, etc. Compiled and edited by John S.
Farmer, . . . [and W. E. Henley]   [London]   Printed for subscribers
only. M DCCC XC. [-XCVI] _4to, seven volumes, half red calf, uncut
edges._

No. 509 of seven hundred and fifty copies printed. Volume II is dated
1891, III, 1893, IV, 1896 (the last two edited by Farmer and W. E.
Henley), V, 1902, VI, 1903, VII, 1904.


FARMER, JOHN S., _editor_.--National Ballad and Song   Merry Songs and
Ballads prior to the year A. D. 1800 edited by John S. Farmer . . .
Privately printed for subscribers only M D CCC XCVII. _4to, five
volumes, boards, uncut edges._


FARRAGO. [By "Pilgrim Plowden"]   Printed for the author. Price 2s. 6d.
stitcht. To be sold only by Lawton Gilliver . . . London. 1733.
_8vo, red straight-grain morocco, gilt and blind-tooled back and side
borders, gilt edges._


FAU, J.--The Anatomy of the External Forms of Man, intended for the use
of Artists, Painters and Sculptors. By Doctor J. Fau. Atlas Containing
Twenty-Eight [coloured] Drawings from Nature; . . . Edited with
Additions by Robert Knox, M. D. . . . London: Hippolyte Bailliere, . . .
1849. _4to, half cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


FAUGERES, MARGARETTA V.--See Bleecker and Faugeres.


FEA, ALLAN.--The Flight of the King Being A Full True and Particular
Account of the Miraculous Escape of His Most Sacred Majesty King Charles
II. after the Battle of Worcester   By Allan Fea With Numerous Sketches
& Photographs by the Author & 16 Portraits in Photogravure   John Lane,
. . . London & New York   m:d.ccc.xcvii. _8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._


FELISSA; or, the Life and Opinions of a Kitten of Sentiment. . . . [12
coloured plates]   London: printed for J. Harris, . . . 1811. _12mo,
silk, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


FELLOWES, W. D.--A Visit to the Monastery of La Trappe, in 1817: with
Notes taken during a tour through le Perchie, Normandy, Bretagne,
Poitou, Anjou, le Bocage, Touraine, Orleanois, and the environs of
Paris. By W. D. Fellowes, Esq. Illustrated with numerous coloured
engravings, from drawings made on the spot. London: printed for William
Stockdale, . . . 1818. _8vo, figured brown silk, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

Twelve coloured plates, one etching, one outline plate, and one vignette
on India paper.


FELLTHAM, OWEN.--Resolves, Divine Moral and Political by Owen Felltham
Esq.   London, Pickering   1840. _Post 8vo, citron morocco, back and
side panels, gilt top, uncut edges._

Title-page within a border and rubricated.


FEMALE FACTION.--The Female Faction: or, the Gay Subscribers. A poem. . . .
London: Printed for J. Roberts, . . . M. DCC. XXIX. . . . _Folio,
cloth, by The Club Bindery._


FENELON, FRANCOIS DE SALIGNAC DE LA MOTHE.--The Lives And most
remarkable Maxims Of the Antient Philosophers   London: Printed for B.
Barker . . . and R. Francklin . . . 1726. _12mo, sprinkled calf, gilt
back, gilt over uncut edges, by Bedford._


FENN, GEORGE MANVILLE.--Benjamin Franklin Stevens   By G. Manville Fenn
   London printed at the Chiswick Press for private distribution   1903.
_Crown 8vo, buckram, uncut edges._

Seven illustrations.


FENTON, ELIJAH.--Poems on Several Occasions. [large printer's
ornament]   London: Printed for Bernard Lintot . . . 1717. _8vo, blue
straight-grain morocco, gilt back, side corners, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition. Engraved frontispiece by E. Kirkall, and arms of the Earl
of Orrery, to whom the work is dedicated.


FERGUSON, JAMES.--(I-II.) The Illustrated Handbook of Architecture:
being a concise and popular account of the different styles of
architecture prevailing in all ages and countries. By James Ferguson, . . .
with 850 illustrations on wood. London: John Murray, . . . 1855.
(III.) History of the Modern Styles of Architecture: being a sequel to
the Handbook of Architecture . . . with 312 illustrations. London: John
Murray, . . . 1862. _8vo, three volumes, russia, gilt back, gilt edges,
by Bedford._

First edition of both series.


FERGUSSON, JAMES.--The Illustrated Handbook of Architecture: being a
concise and popular account of the different styles of architecture
prevailing in All Ages and all Countries. By James Fergusson, . . .
Second Edition, with nearly 900 illustrative engravings. London: John
Murray, . . . 1859. _8vo, half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


FERGUSSON, JAMES.--(I.-II.) A History of Architecture in all countries,
from the earliest times to the present day. By James Fergusson . . .
second edition. [1015 illustrations] London: John Murray, . . . 1874
(III.) History of Indian and Eastern Architecture; by James Fergusson,
. . . [394 illustrations]   London: John Murray, . . . 1876 (IV.)
History of the Modern Styles of Architecture: being a sequel to the
Handbook of Architecture. By James Fergusson . . . with 312
illustrations. London: John Murray, . . . 1862. _8vo, four volumes, half
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


FERRIAR, JOHN.--Illustrations of Sterne: with other essays and verses.
By John Ferriar, M.D.   Second edition   London: printed for Cadell and
Davis . . . 1812. _Small 8vo, two volumes, sprinkled calf, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Bedford._


FIDDES, RICHARD.--A Prefatory Epistle Concerning some Remarks To be
published on Homer's Iliad: Occasioned by The Proposals of Mr. Pope
towards a new English Version of that Poem. To the Reverend Dr.
Swift, Dean of St. Patrick's. By Richard Fiddes, B.D. Chaplain to the
Right Honourable the Earl of Oxford. [Line in Greek]   London: Printed
for John Wyat, . . . and Henry Clements, . . . 1714. _12mo, half brown
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


FIELDING, HENRY.--(I.) Love in Several Masques. A Comedy, As it is Acted
at the Theatre-Royal, by His Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr.
Fielding. . . . London: Printed for John Watts, . . . 1728.

(II.) The Temple Beau. A Comedy. As it is Acted at the Theatre in
Goodman's-Fields. Written by Mr. Fielding. . . . London: Printed for J.
Watts, . . . M DCC XXX.

(III.) The Coffee-House Politician; or, the Justice Caught in his
own Trap. A Comedy. As it is Acted at the Theatre Royal in
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. Written by Mr. Fielding. London: Printed for J.
Watts, . . . M DCC XXX. . . .

(IV.) The Grub-Street Opera. As it is Acted at the Theatre in the
Hay-Market. By Scriblerus Secundus. . . . To which is added, The
Masquerade, a poem. Printed in MDCC XXVIII. London, Printed, and sold
by J. Roberts, . . . M DCC XXX I. . . .

(V.) The Universal Gallant: or, the Different Husbands. A Comedy. As it
is Acted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. By His Majesty's Servants.
By Henry Fielding, Esq; . . . London: Printed for John Watts, . . . M
DCCXXXV. . . .

(VI.) Miss Lucy in Town. A Sequel to The Virgin Unmasqued. A Farce;
With Songs. As it is Acted at the Theatre-Royal In Drury-lane, By His
Majesty's Servants. London: Printed for A. Millar, . . . 1742. . . .

(VII.) Tumble-down Dick: or, Phaeton in the Suds. A Dramatick
Entertainment of Walking, in Serious and Foolish Characters:
Interlarded with Burlesque, Grotesque, Comick Interludes, call'd
Harlequin a Pick-Pocket. As it is Perform'd at the New Theatre in the
Hay-Market. Being ('tis hop'd) the last Entertainment that will ever
be exhibited on any Stage. Invented by the Ingenious Monsieur Sans
Esprit: The Musick compos'd by the Harmonious Signior Warblerini. And
the Scenes painted by the Prodigious Mynheer van Bottom-flat. . . .
London: Printed for J. Watts . . . M DCC XLIV. . . .

(VIII.) The Intriguing Chambermaid. A Comedy of two acts. As it is Acted
at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane, By His Majesty's Servants. Taken
from the French of Regnard, By Henry Fielding, Esq; . . . London:
Printed for J. Watts . . . M DCCL. . . .

(IX.) The Letter-writers: Or, a New Way to Keep a Wife at Home. A farce,
In three acts. As it is Acted at the Theatre in the Hay-Market. Written
by Henry Fielding, Esq; . . . London: Printed for J. Watts . . . M
DCCL. _8vo, nine works in one volume, brown morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges_.

First editions. The running head-line of "The Coffee-House Politician"
is "Rape upon Rape."


FIELDING, HENRY.--The Dramatic Works of Henry Fielding, Esq. . . .
London, Printed for A. Millar, . . . M DCC LV. _Post 8vo, three volumes,
Spanish calf, gilt back, citron edges._

First collected edition.

The sub-titles have different dates, and the plays contained in each
volume are not those indicated on the general titles.

I. 1. The Covent Garden Tragedy, 1754. 2. Historical Register for 1736,
1741. 3. The Mock Doctor, 1761. 4. The Lottery, 5th ed., 1761. 5.
Tumble-down Dick, 1744. 6. The Intriguing Chambermaid, 1761. 7. Miss
Lucy in Town, 2nd ed., 1756. 8. The Debauchees, 3rd ed., 1750. 9. The
Universal Gallant, 1735.

II. 1. Pasquin, 3rd ed., 1754. 2. The Miser, 4th ed., 1761. 3.
Grub-Street Opera, 1731. 4. The Masquerade, 1728. 5. The Letter-writers,
or a New Way to Keep a Wife Home, 1750. 6. Life and Death of Tom Thumb,
4th ed., 1751. 7. Author's Farce, 3rd ed., 1750.

III. 1. Don Quixote in England, 1754. 2. The Modern Husband, 2nd ed.,
1732. 3. An Old Man taught Wisdom, or the Virgin Unmasked, 4th ed.,
1749. 4. Love in Several Masques, 1728. 5. The Coffee-House Politician,
or the Justice Caught in his own Trap (the running-title is Rape upon
Rape; or, the Justice caught in his own Trap), 1730. 6. The Temple Beau,
1730.

Volume II contains a plate by Van der Gucht after Hogarth.


FIELDING, HENRY.--The History of the Adventures of Joseph Andrews, And
of his Friend Mr. Abraham Adams. Written in Imitation of The Manner of
Cervantes, Author of Don Quixote. London: Printed for A. Millar . . .
M.DCC.XLII. _12mo, two volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


FIELDING, HENRY.--The Adventures of Joseph Andrews. By Henry Fielding,
Esq. with [4] illustrations by George Cruikshank. London: James Cochrane
and Co., . . . 1832. _Post 8vo, half maroon levant morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges, by V. Krafft._


FIELDING, HENRY.--Miscellanies, by Henry Fielding: . . . London: Printed
for the Author: And sold by A. Millar . . . MDCCXLIII. _8vo, three
volumes, brown levant morocco, centre ornaments on the sides, gilt
edges, by Riviere._

Large paper copy of the first edition.


FIELDING, HENRY.--The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling . . . By Henry
Fielding. London: Printed for A. Millar . . . MDCCXLIX. _12mo, six
volumes, old calf._

First edition.


FIELDING, HENRY.--The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling. By Henry
Fielding, Esq; . . . Paris: Printed by Fr. Amb. Didot the eldest . . .
M.DCC.LXXX. _8vo, four volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by David._

Holland paper copy from the collection of A. A. Renouard, with his
autograph in the third volume.

Illustrated by the addition of six portraits of Fielding and over one
hundred plates, proofs on India paper and before letters, etc., by
Moreau le jeune, Borel, Unwins, Stothard, Clennell, Johannot, Corbould,
etc., many in two and three states.


FIELDING, HENRY.--The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling. By Henry
Fielding, Esq. with a Memoir of the Author by Thomas Roscoe Esq. and
Illustrations by George Cruikshank   London: James Cochrane and Co. . . .
1831. _Post 8vo, two volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Portrait, eight plates by Cruikshank, also (inserted) the illustrations
by Moreau (coloured) and Johannot, proofs on India paper.


FIELDING, HENRY.--An Enquiry Into the Causes of the late Increase of
Robbers, &c. with some Proposals for Remedying this Growing Evil. In
which The Present Reigning Vices are impartially exposed; and the
Laws that relate to the Provision for the Poor, and to the
Punishment of Felons are largely and freely examined. . . . By Henry
Fielding, Esq; Barrister at Law, and One of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, and for the City
and Liberty of Westminster. London: Printed for A. Millar, . . . M.
DCC. LI. [Price 2s. 6d.]   _8vo, red levant morocco, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition. Dedicated to Philip Lord Hardwick, Lord High Chancellor.


FIELDING, HENRY.--Amelia. By Henry Fielding, Esq; . . . London: Printed
for A. Millar, . . . M.DCC.LII. _12mo, four volumes, old calf, gilt
back._

First edition.


FIELDING, HENRY.--The History of Amelia. By Henry Fielding, Esq. With
[8] illustrations by George Cruikshank. . . . London: James Cochrane and
Co., . . . 1832. _Post 8vo, two volumes, half maroon levant morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges, by V. Krafft._


FIELDING, HENRY.--(I.) A Clear State of the Case of Elizabeth Canning,
Who hath sworn that she was robbed and almost starved to Death
by a Gang of Gipsies and other Villains in January last, for which
one Mary Squires now lies under Sentence of Death. [Three lines from
Cicero. Parad.]   By Henry Fielding, Esq; London: Printed for A.
Millar . . . M. DCC. LIII. (Price One Shilling.) (II.) A clear State of
the Case of Elizabeth Canning, . . . [same text as above]   The second
edition. London: Printed for A. Millar . . . M. DCC. LIII. (Price One
Shilling.) _8vo, three works in one volume, brown morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges. Bound with these two editions is DR. HILL'S
"Story of Elizabeth Canning considered."_

Etched portrait by Worlidge inserted.


FIELDING, HENRY.--The Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon, By the late Henry
Fielding, Esq; London: Printed for A. Millar, . . . MDCCLV. _12mo, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


FIELDING, HENRY.--The Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon by Henry Fielding
with introduction and notes by Austin Dobson. London printed and issued
by Charles Whittingham & Co . . . MDCCCXCII. _12mo, half vellum, uncut
edges._

One of twenty-five copies printed on Japanese vellum paper, with a
portrait of Fielding.


FIELDING, HENRY.--The Works of Henry Fielding, Esq; with The Life of the
Author [by Arthur Murphy]. A New Edition, in ten volumes. To which is
now added, The Fathers; or, The Good-natured Man. London: Printed for W.
Strahan &c MDCCLXXXIV. _8vo, ten volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt edges,
by Bedford._

Portrait, by Basire after Hogarth, and twelve plates by Collyer after
Rooker's designs.


FIELDING, HENRY.--The Works of Henry Fielding, Esq. with an Essay on his
life and genius, by Arthur Murphy, . . . A new edition, . . . London:
Printed for F. C. and J. Rivington, &c . . . 1821. _8vo, ten volumes,
original boards, uncut edges._

Portrait after Hogarth. Printed from the quarto edition of 1762.


FIELDING, HENRY.--The Fathers: or, The Good-Natur'd Man. A comedy. As it
is Acted at the Theatre Royal, in Drury-Lane. By the late Henry
Fielding, Esq. author of Tom Jones, etc. London: Printed for T. Cadell,
. . . M DCC LXXVIII. (Price One Shilling and Six Pence.) _8vo, sprinkled
calf, gilt back, some edges uncut._

First edition. A-P in fours, title on A1. Written many years before
Fielding's death, and mentioned by him in the preface to his
Miscellanies, 1743, as "The Good Natured Man." Dedication by John
Fielding to the Duke of Northumberland, Prologue and Epilogue by
Garrick.


FIELDING, SIR JOHN.--See Jest-Books.


FIELDING, SARAH.--The Lives of Cleopatra and Octavia. By The Author of
David Simple. London: Printed for the Author, And Sold by Andrew Millar,
. . . R. and J. Dodsley, . . . and J. Leake, . . . M. DCC. LVII. _4to,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges._


FIELDING, THEODORE HENRY ADOLPHUS.--The Theory and Practice of Painting
in Oil and Water Colours, for landscape and portraits; including the
preparation of colours, vehicles, varnishes, etc., method of painting in
wax, or encaustic; remarks on the chemical properties and permanency of
colours, etc.; and a Manual of Lithography. Illustrated with [18] plain
and coloured plates. By T.H. Fielding, . . . Fifth edition. London:
David Bogue, . . . M DCCC LII. _Royal 8vo, half green levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


FIELDS, JAMES THOMAS.--Poems by James T. Fields. Boston: William D.
Ticknor & Company. MDCCC XLIX. _12mo, original cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


FILSON, JOHN.--The Discovery, Settlement And present state of Kentucke:
and An Essay towards the Topography, and Natural History of that
important Country. To which is added, An Appendix, Containing, I. The
Adventures of Col. Daniel Boon, one of the first Settlers, comprehending
every important Occurrence in the political History of that Province.
II. The Minutes of the Piankashaw Council, held at Post St. Vincents,
April 15, 1784. III An Account of the Indian Nations inhabiting within
the Limits of the Thirteen United States, their Manners and Customs, and
Reflections on their Origin. IV. The Stages and Distances between
Philadelphia and the Falls of the Ohio, from Pittsburg to Pensacola, and
several other Places.--The Whole illustrated by a new and accurate Map
of Kentucke and the Country adjoining, drawn from actual Surveys. By
John Filson. Wilmington: Printed by James Adams. 1784. _8vo and 4to,
green levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges; the book by Bradstreet's,
the map by Joly._

The excessively rare Map, for many years believed to be a mistaken
promise of the title-page, is found with this copy, though bound
separately. Manuscript by Daniel Boone and portrait inserted.


FIRDUSI (FIRDAUSI: ABUL KASIM MANSUR).--The Epic of Kings Stories
retold from Firdusi by Helen Zimmern   with two etchings by L. Alma
Tadema,--and a prefatory poem by Edmund W. Gosse   London   T. Fisher
Unwin   M DCCC LXXXII. _4to, decorated cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


FISHER, JOSEPH.--Eighty-four Etched Fac-similes, on a reduced scale,
after the Original Studies by Michael Angelo and Raffaelle in the
University Galleries, Oxford. Etched and published by Joseph Fisher . . .
Second Series. Oxford, M DCCC LXII. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


FISHER, RICHARD.--Catalogue of a Collection of Engravings, Etchings, and
Woodcuts. [with sixty-five illustrations] 1879. [Printed by John C.
Wilkins.] _Royal 8vo, half maroon morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


FISHER, RICHARD.--Introduction to a Catalogue of the Early Italian
Prints in the British Museum by Richard Fisher--London   printed at the
Chiswick Press   1886. _Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


FISHER'S GARLAND.--A Collection of Right Merrie Garlands for North
Country Anglers. Newcastle: printed for Emerson Charnley   MDCCCXXXVI.
_8vo, half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Woodcuts by Bewick.

These "Garlands" begin with the "Tyne Fisher's Farewell to his Favourite
Stream," 1824, followed by the Fisher's Garland from 1821 to 1832, and
end with "The Angler's Progress; a Poem" [by Herman Boaz], each with a
separate title and woodcut, the dates from 1820 to 1832.

Robert Roxby and Thomas Doubleday wrote the Fisher's Garland for
1821-3-4-5-6-'30, and '32, William Gill Thompson, 1822, '31 (and the
"Tyne Fisher's Farewell"), William Green in 1827, Thomas Doubleday, 1828
and '29.


FISHER'S GARLAND.--A Collection of Right Merrie Garlands for North
Country Anglers. Edited by Joseph Crawhall and continued to this present
year   Newcastle-on-Tyne: George Rutland . . . 1864. _8vo, half
Roxburghe morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Woodcuts by Bewick, etc.

The authors were Herman Boaz, Robert Roxby, Thomas Doubleday, William
Gill Thompson, William Green, Robert Nichol, and William Andrew Chatto.


FISHING.--The Whole Art of Fishing. Being A Collection and Improvement
of all that has been written upon this Subject: with many New
Experiments. Shewing The Different Ways of Angling, and the best
Methods of taking Fresh-water Fish. To which is added, The Laws of
Angling. [Twelve lines from Pope]   London, Printed for E. Curll, . . .
1714. Price 2s. or 2s. 6d. _Small 8vo, panelled calf, gilt back._

Frontispiece by H. Halsbergh.


FITZGERALD, EDWARD.--Euphranor a dialogue on youth   London   William
Pickering   1851. _16mo, cloth._

First edition.


FITZGERALD, EDWARD.--See Omar Khayyam.


FITZGERALD, PERCY.--The Life of David Garrick; from original family
papers, and numerous published and unpublished sources. By Percy
Fitzgerald . . . [two portraits]   London: Tinsley Brothers . . . 1868.
_8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


FITZGERALD, PERCY.--The Romance of the English Stage. By Percy
Fitzgerald . . . London: Richard Bentley & Son . . . 1874. _8vo, two
volumes, half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


FLAUBERT, GUSTAVE.--Bouvard and Pecuchet authorised edition translated
from the French with an introduction by D. F. Hannigan, . . .
illustrated with nine original designs after S. Gorski   London   H. S.
Nichols . . . 1896 . . . _8vo, decorated green satin, gilt top, uncut
edges._

One hundred copies printed upon Japan paper, with illustrations in two
states, blue and bistre.


FLAXMAN, JOHN.--Compositions from the Tragedies of AEschylus designed by
Iohn Flaxman engraved by Thomas Piroli   London   Published for I.
Flaxman Jun^{r}. Jan. 12. 1795, by J. Matthews . . . _Oblong 4to, boards,
uncut edges._

Engraved title and thirty other outline plates.


FLAXMAN, JOHN.--Lectures on Sculpture. By John Flaxman . . . with a
brief memoir of the author. London: John Murray . . . MDCCCXXIX. _Royal
8vo, red morocco, gilt and blind-tooled, gilt edges._

Portrait of Flaxman on India paper and fifty-one plates. The plates are
numbered from one to fifty-two, but plate eighteen was cancelled.

From the library of Sir Thomas Lawrence, with his autograph.


FLAXMAN, JOHN.--Lectures on Sculpture. 1829. . . . _Royal 8vo, calf,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Another copy.


FLAXMAN, JOHN.--See Homer.


FLETCHER, WILLIAM YOUNGER.--English Book-bindings in the British Museum
   illustrations of sixty-three examples selected on account of their
beauty or historial interest   with introduction and descriptions   by
William Younger Fletcher . . . The plates printed in facsimile by W.
Griggs . . . London   Kegan Paul, Trench, Truebner and Company, . . .
1895. _4to, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 137 of five hundred copies printed.

Sixty-six plates in colour.


FLETCHER, WILLIAM YOUNGER.--Foreign Book-bindings in the British Museum
   illustrations of sixty-three examples selected on account of their
beauty or historical interest   with introduction and descriptions   by
William Younger Fletcher . . . The plates printed in facsimile by W.
Griggs . . . London   Kegan Paul, Trench, Truebner and Company, . . .
1896. _4to, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 71 of five hundred copies printed. Sixty-five coloured plates.


FLETCHER, WILLIAM YOUNGER.--English Book Collectors by William Younger
Fletcher . . . London   Kegan Paul, Trench, Truebner and Company, . . .
1902. _4to, vellum boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 40 of fifty copies printed on Japanese paper. Woodcut title-page and
forty-six illustrations.


FLORA. Songs in the Opera of Flora, with the Humorous Scenes of Hob,
design'd by ye Celebrated Mr Gravelot, & engrav'd by G. Bickham jun^{r}.
The Music proper for ye Violin, German, & Common Flute, Harpsichord or
Spinet with a New Base, & thoro' Base to each Song. London. Sold by T.
Cooper . . . 1737. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Bedford._

Twenty-eight engraved pages, twenty-five with illustrations by Gravelot.


FLOWERS OF FABLE, from Northcote, AEsop, Croxall, Gellert, Dodsley, Gay,
La Fontaine, Lessing, Krasicki, Herder, Merrick, Cowper, etc. With
numerous engravings. New York: Harper & Brothers, . . . 1847. _16mo,
original silk binding, gilt edges._


FOOTE, SAMUEL.--The Maid of Bath; a comedy in three acts: as performed
at the Theatre-Royal in the Haymarket [1771]: written by the late Samuel
Foote, Esq. and published by Mr. Colman. London: Printed for W.
Lowndes, and S. Bladon. 1795. _8vo, Scotch plaid silk._

Prologue by Garrick, Epilogue by Cumberland. Title and B-E4 in eights.


FOOTE, SAMUEL.--The Dramatic Works of Samuel Foote, Esq. to which is
prefixed a Life of the Author . . . London: printed for A. Millar . . .
M,DCC,XCVII. _12mo, two volumes, sprinkled calf, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Bedford._


FOOTE, SAMUEL.--The Works of Samuel Foote, Esq. with Remarks on each
Play, and an Essay on the Life and Writings of the Author, By John Bee
Esq. . . . London: Sherwood, Gilbert, and Piper . . . 1830. _12mo, three
volumes, sprinkled calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Portrait of Foote after Reynolds.


FOOTE AND HOOK.--Bon-Mots of Samuel Foote and Theodore Hook edited by
Walter Jerrold with grotesques by Aubrey Beardsley   London: Published
by J. M. Dent and Company . . . MDCCCXCIV. _Foolscap 8vo, buckram, uncut
edges._

No. 77 of one hundred large paper copies printed, with portraits of
Foote and Hook.


FORD, RICHARD.--Twelve Etchings, after drawings and engravings by
Parmigianino, and Andrea Meldolla: in the collection of Richard Ford.
London   1822. _4to, original boards._

The twelve etchings by Ford are in two, three, and four states, and
eight additional etchings, also by Ford, show various stages of
progress. The issue was limited and privately printed. This copy
contains the autograph of Ford and his presentation inscription to Henry
Wellesley.


FORSTER, HENRY RUMSEY.--See Boaden, Forster, and others.


FORSTER, JOHN.--The Life and Adventures of Oliver Goldsmith. A
biography: in four books [portrait]   By John Forster, . . . London:
Bradbury & Evans, . . . and Chapman & Hall, . . . 1848. _Crown 8vo,
original cloth, gilt edges._

First edition. Numerous woodcuts.


FORSTER, JOHN.--The Life and Times of Oliver Goldsmith. By John Forster
. . . second edition. London: Bradbury and Evans . . . 1854. _8vo, two
volumes in four, green levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges,
by William Matthews._

Illustrated by the insertion of two hundred and five portraits,
including many fine proofs and plates in two states.


FORSTER, JOHN.--The Life of Charles Dickens. By John Forster . . .
London: Chapman and Hall . . . 1872 [1873-'74]. _8vo, three volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

Six portraits, and numerous other illustrations.


FORSYTH, WILLIAM.--Hortensius: or, the Advocate, an historical essay. By
William Forsyth . . . London: John Murray . . . 1849. _12mo, cloth,
uncut edges._


FORSYTH, WILLIAM.--History of Trial by Jury. By William Forsyth . . .
London: John W. Parker and Son . . . M.DCCC.LII. _8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


FORSYTH, WILLIAM.--History of the Captivity of Napoleon at St. Helena;
from the letters and journals of the late Lieut.-Gen. Sir Hudson Lowe,
and official documents not before made public. By William Forsyth, . . .
With Portrait and Map. [and two other illustrations]   London: John
Murray, . . . 1853. . . . _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


FORTNUM, C. DRURY E.--A descriptive Catalogue of Maiolica
Hispano-Moresco, Persian, Damascus, and Rhodian wares, in the South
Kensington Museum. With Historical Notices, Marks, & Monograms. By C.
Drury E. Fortnum, . . . London: printed by George E. Eyre and William
Spottiswoode, . . . 1873. _Royal 8vo, half brown morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._

Twelve coloured plates and numerous woodcuts.


FORTNUM, C. DRURY E.--Maiolica a historical treatise on the glazed and
enamelled earthenwares of Italy, with marks and monograms also some
notice of the Persian Damascus, Rhodian, and Hispano-Moresque Wares by
C. Drury E. Fortnum with illustrations [21 plates, including coloured
frontispiece]   Oxford at the Clarendon Press   1896. _Royal 4to, cloth,
gilt top, uncut edges._


FOSS, HENRY.--See Payne and Foss.


FOSTER AND TAYLOR.--Birket Foster's [30] Pictures of English Landscape.
(Engraved by the Brothers Dalziel) with Pictures in Words by Tom Taylor.
London: Routledge, Warne, and Routledge. . . . MDCCC LXIII. _4to, green
levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges._


FOSTER, JOHN.--An Essay of the Evils of Popular Ignorance: and a
discourse on the communication of Christianity to the people of
Hindoostan. By John Foster. Third edition. London: Holdsworth and Ball
. . . 1834. _8vo, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


FOSTER AND ATKINSON, _editors_.--An illustrated Catalogue of the Loan
Collection of Plate exhibited in the Fitzwilliam Museum May 1895 by J.
E. Foster, . . . and T. D. Atkinson   Cambridge   Deighton Bell & Co and
Macmillan & Bowes for the Cambridge Antiquarian Society   1896. _Royal
4to, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 156 of two hundred and sixty copies printed. Sixteen plates and
fifteen illustrations in the text.


FOUCHE, JOSEPH.--The Memoirs of Joseph Fouche, Duke of Otranto, Minister
of the General Police of France. With a portrait. [engraved by Vincent
from the rare print suppressed by the French Police]   Translated from
the French. . . . London: printed for Charles Knight, . . . M DCCC XXV.
_8vo, two volumes, blue morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

First edition.


FOUQUE, LAMOTTE.--Peter Schlemihl: from the German of Lamotte Fouque.
With [8] plates by George Cruikshank. London: G. and W. B. Whittaker . . .
1824. _12mo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Riviere._

First edition. Though attributed to Fouque, the real author was Adalbert
von Chamisso. Fouque, however, suggested the plot.


FOUQUE, LA MOTTE.--See Woltmann and Fouque.


FRANCIS, JOHN W.--Old New York: or, Reminiscences of the Past Sixty
Years. By John W. Francis, . . . with a memoir of the author, by Henry
T. Tuckerman. New York: W. J. Widdleton, . . . M DCCC LXV. _Royal 8vo,
unbound._

Large paper copy. Two portraits and a view.


FRANCKLIN, THOMAS.--Matilda: a tragedy. As it is performed at the
Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. By the Author of the Earl of Warwick.
London: Printed for T. Cadell, . . . 1775. . . . _8vo, morocco, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition.


FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN.--An Account Of the Newly Invented Pennsylvanian
Fire-Places: wherein Their Construction and Manner of Operation is
particularly explained; Their Advantages above every other Method of
Warming Rooms demonstrated; And all Objections that have been raised
against the Use of Them, answered and obviated. With Directions for
putting them up, and for Using them to the best Advantage. And a
Copper-Plate, in which the several Parts of the Machine are exactly laid
down, from a Scale of equal Parts. Philadelphia: Printed and Sold by B.
Franklin. 1744. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back and sides, by The
Club Bindery._

Includes the folded plate as well as the original covers.


FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN.--Poor Richard improved: being an Almanack and
Ephemeris of the Motions of the Sun and Moon; the true Places and
Aspects of the Planets; the Rising and Setting of the Sun; and the
Rising, Setting and Southing of the Moon, for the Year of our Lord
1757: [1758:] Being the First [Second] after Leap-Year. . . . By
Richard Saunders, Philom. Philadelphia: Printed and Sold by B. Franklin,
and D. Hall. _12mo, two volumes, light brown levant morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges, in a brown straight-grain morocco case, by Bedford._


FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN.--The Way to Wealth or Poor Richard Improved by
Benjamin Franklin. Paris. Printed for Ant. Aug. Renouard . . .
M.DCC.XCV. _8vo, blue morocco, back richly tooled, panelled sides, silk
linings, gilt over uncut edges, by Bozerian._

Large and thick paper copy: six printed, with proof impression of the
portrait by Tardieu after Duplessis. The greater part of this book is
accompanied by a French translation. Following the well-known Epitaph
are twenty-eight pages preceded by the sub-title, "Observations sur les
Sauvages du Nord de l'Amerique, par Franklin," with a separate
pagination and not included in the Table.

Charles Nodier's copy.


FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN.--The Way to Wealth. 1795. _12mo, citron levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by David._

Another copy printed upon large paper, with proof impression of the
portrait of Franklin by Tardieu after Duplessis.


FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN.--The Way to Wealth or Poor Richard Improved by Benj.
Franklin. Paris, Printed for Ant. Aug. Renouard, [by P. Causse at
Dijon] . . . M.DCC.XCV. _12mo, red levant morocco, gilt back, side
corners after the manner of Roger Payne, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Large paper copy, with two impressions of the exquisite portrait of
Franklin by Alex. Tardieu after Duplessis, one a proof before the name
on the tablet.


FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN.--[Poor Richard. Bowles's Moral Pictures; Being
Lessons for the Young and the Old, on Industry, Temperance, Frugality,
&c. or Poor Richard Illustrated. By the late Dr. Benj. Franklin.] _4to,
half green morocco, gilt edges._

A portfolio containing the twenty-four original water-colour drawings by
Dighton, with the engravings published by Bowles; also original
water-colour drawings of Franklin and his press, and two engraved
portraits.


FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN.--The Private Life of the late Benjamin Franklin, LL.
D. late Minister Plenipotentiary from the United States of America to
France, &c. &c. &c. Originally written by Himself, and now translated
from the French. To which are added, some account of his public life, a
variety of anecdotes concerning him, by M. M. Brissot, Condorcet,
Rochefoucault, Le Roy, &c. &c. and the eulogium of M. Fauchet, . . .
London: printed for J. Parsons, . . . 1793. _8vo, half maroon levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN.--The Works of Benjamin Franklin; containing several
political and historical tracts not included in any former edition, and
many letters official and private not hitherto published; with notes and
a life of the author. By Jared Sparks. . . . Boston: Hilliard Gray, and
Company. 1840. _Royal 8vo, ten volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Large paper copy.

Twenty-two plates, including five portraits.


FRANKS, DAVID.--See New York Directory.


FRANKUM, RICHARD.--The Bee and the Wasp. A Fable.--In Verse. With [4]
designs and etchings, by G. Cruikshank. . . . London: Charles Tilt, . . .
1832. _Small 8vo, half blue calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
with the original yellow paper covers bound in._

First edition.


FRANKUM, RICHARD.--The Bee and the Wasp   a fable in verse with [4]
illustrations designed and etched by George Cruikshank   London   Basil
Montagu Pickering . . . 1861. _Small 4to, original boards, uncut edges._

Second edition. The preface is signed R. F.


FREER, MARTHA WALKER.--The Life of Marguerite d'Angouleme, Queen of
Navarre, Duchesse d'Alencon and de Berry, sister of Francis I., King of
France. From numerous unpublished sources, including MS. documents in
the Bibliotheque Imperiale, and the Archives du Royaume de France, and
also the private correspondence of Queen Marguerite with Francis I., &c.
. . . By Martha Walker Freer. . . . [Mrs. John Robinson]   London: Hurst
and Blackett, . . . 1854. _Post 8vo, two volumes, blue morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with three steel plates.


FREER, MARTHA WALKER.--The Life of Jeanne d'Albret, Queen of Navarre. . . .
By Martha Walker Freer, . . . London: Hurst and Blackett, . . .
1855. _Post 8vo, two volumes, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition, with two steel plates.


FREER, MARTHA WALKER.--Elizabeth de Valois, Queen of Spain, and the
Court of Philip II. From numerous unpublished sources, in the Archives
of France, Italy, and Spain. By Martha Walker Freer. London: Hurst and
Blackett . . . 1857. _Post 8vo, two volumes, blue morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Portraits of Elizabeth de Valois and Catherine de Medici,
engraved by A. T. Heath.


FREER, MARTHA WALKER.--Henry III. King of France and Poland: his Court
and Times. From numerous unpublished sources, including MS. Documents in
the Bibliotheque Imperiale, and the Archives of France and Italy, etc.
By Martha Walker Freer. London: Hurst and Blackett . . . 1858. _Post
8vo, three volumes, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition. Three portraits engraved by Baker.


FREER, MARTHA WALKER.--History of the Reign of Henry IV. King of France
and Navarre . . . Part I. Henry IV and the League. By Martha Walker
Freer. . . . London: Hurst and Blackett, . . . 1860. _Post 8vo, two
volumes, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with two steel plates.


FREER, MARTHA WALKER.--Henry IV. and Marie de Medici. Part II. of the
History of the Reign of Henry IV. King of France and Navarre . . . By
Martha Walker Freer . . . London: Hurst and Blackett . . . 1861. _Post
8vo, two volumes, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition: with portraits of Marguerite de Valois and Marie de
Medici.


FREER, MARTHA WALKER.--The Last Decade of a Glorious Reign. Part III. of
the History of the Reign of Henry IV. King of France and Navarre . . .
By Martha Walker Freer . . . London: Hurst and Blackett . . . 1863.
_Post 8vo, two volumes, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition. Portraits of the Marquise de Verneuil and the Princesse
de Conde and her children.


FREER, MARTHA WALKER.--The Married Life of Anne of Austria, Queen of
France, Mother of Louis XIV. and Don Sebastian, King of Portugal.
Historical Studies. From numerous unpublished sources, . . . By Martha
Walker Freer, . . . London: Tinsley Brothers, . . . 1864. _8vo, two
volumes, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with steel portrait of the Queen.


FREER, MARTHA WALKER.--The Regency of Anne of Austria, Queen Regent of
France, Mother of Louis XIV. from numerous unpublished sources, . . . By
Martha Walker Freer, . . . London: Tinsley Brothers, . . . 1866. _8vo,
two volumes, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with steel portrait.


FRENEAU, PHILIP.--Poems Written between the Years 1768 & 1794, by Philip
Freneau, of New Jersey: A New Edition, Revised and Corrected by the
Author; Including a considerable number of Pieces never before
published. . . . Monmouth [N. J.] printed At the Press of the Author,
at Mount-Pleasant, near Middletown-Point; M, DCC, XCV: and, of--American
Independence--XIX. _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by Matthews._


FRENEAU, PHILIP.--Poems written and published during the American
Revolutionary War, and now republished from the original manuscripts;
interspersed with translations from the ancients, and other pieces not
heretofore in print. By Philip Freneau. . . . The third edition, in two
volumes. . . . Philadelphia: from the press of Lydia R. Bailey, . . .
1809. _12mo, two volumes, brown levant morocco, doubled with dark green
russia, tooled in gilt, russia guards, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Two frontispieces, King Tammany and Captain Paul Jones's Victory,
engraved by Joh. Eckstein.

According to Freneau's declaration in a letter to Jefferson, May 27,
1809, this is the first edition of his poems that received his personal
attention, "the other two having been published, while I was wandering
over gloomy Seas, until _embargoed_ by the necessity of the times."
Later he wrote to Madison, "That Edition [1809] was published by
_Subscription_ merely for the benefit of, and to assist Mrs. Bailey, an
unfortunate but deserving widowed female, niece to General Steele, and
this consideration alone induced me to pay some attention to that third
Edition."


FRENEAU, PHILIP.--A Bibliography of the separate and collected works of
Philip Freneau together with an account of his newspapers   By Victor
Hugo Paltsits . . . New York   Dodd, Mead and Company   1903. _12mo,
original gray paper covers._


FRERE, JOHN HOOKHAM.--The Works of the Right Honourable John Hookham
Frere in verse and prose . . . Memoir by the Right Hon. Sir Bartle Frere
   Second Edition   Revised with Additions   London   Basil Montagu
Pickering . . . 1874. _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait. Large paper copy.


FRITH, WILLIAM.--John Leech   His Life and Work by William Powell Frith,
R.A. With portrait and numerous illustrations . . . London   Richard
Bentley and Son . . . 1891. _8vo, two volumes, vellum cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition. Presentation copy from the author, with inscription.


FROUDE, JAMES ANTHONY.--History of England from the Fall of Wolsey to
the Death of Elizabeth. By James Anthony Froude, . . . London: John W.
Parker and Son, . . . 1856. [-1870] _8vo, twelve volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

Volumes I-II are dated 1856; III-IV, 1858; V-VI, 1860; VII-VIII, 1866,
"fourth edition" with portrait of Queen Elizabeth engraved by C. H.
Jeens; XI-XII, 1870, "a new edition."


FROUDE, JAMES ANTHONY.--Short Studies on Great Subjects. By James
Anthony Froude, . . . London: Longmans, Green, and Co. 1868. [-1871,
1877, 1883.] _8vo, four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


FROUDE, JAMES ANTHONY.--The Cat's Pilgrimage by James Anthony Froude, . . .
[vignette]   With six illustrations by J. B.   Edinburgh: Edmonston
and Douglas. 1870. _4to, original boards._

Reprinted from "Short Studies of Great Subjects."


FULCHER, GEORGE WILLIAMS.--Life of Thomas Gainsborough, R. A.   By the
late George Williams Fulcher, edited by his son. London: Longman . . .
_Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Frontispiece, title, and birthplace of Gainsborough engraved on steel.


FULLER, MARGARET.--Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli. Boston: Phillips,
Sampson and Company. MDCCCLII. _12mo, two volumes, cloth._

The chapters on Concord and Boston were written by Ralph Waldo Emerson.


FULTON, ROBERT.--A Treatise on the Improvement of Canal Navigation;
exhibiting the numerous advantages to be derived from small canals. And
boats of two to five feet wide, containing from two to five tons
burthen. With a description of the Machinery of facilitating Conveyance
by Water through the most Mountainous Countries, independent of Locks
and Aqueducts: including Observations on the great Importance of Water
Communications, with thoughts on, and designs for, aqueducts and bridges
of iron and wood. Illustrated with seventeen plates. By R. Fulton, Civil
Engineer. London. Published by I. and J. Taylor . . . 1796. _4to,
brown levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition: with forty figures on seventeen plates, and two final
leaves of advertisement.

Inserted are two portraits, one after the original painting by Chappel,
the other by W. S. Leney after Benjamin West.


FULTON, ROBERT.--Torpedo War, and Submarine Explosions. By Robert
Fulton, . . . New York: printed by William Elliot, . . . 1810. _Oblong
4to, brown levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Eight figures on five plates. Presentation copy from the Author to Dr.
Thornton, with inscription on the fly leaf.


FUSELI, HENRY.--See Pilkington, Matthew.


GAINE, HUGH.--The Journals of Hugh Gaine Printer   edited by Paul
Leicester Ford . . . New York   Published by Dodd, Mead & Company . . .
MCMII. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, half vellum, uncut edges._

One of thirty copies printed on Imperial Japan paper: with portrait and
thirty-six other illustrations.


GAINSBOROUGH, THOMAS.--A Collection of Prints illustrative of English
Scenery, from the drawings and sketches of Tho^{s}. Gainsborough, R. A. in
the various collections of the Right Honourable Baroness Lucas; Viscount
Palmerston; George Hibbert, Esq.; Dr. Monro and several other gentlemen
   London: engraved by W. F. Wells and J. Laporte; and published by John
and Josiah Boydell, . . . [n. d.]   _Folio, old red straight-grain
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges._

Sixty plates, for the most part coloured.


GALE, NORMAN.--Marsh Marigolds, by the author of Primulas and Pansies,
etc. Rugby: George E. Over . . . 1888. _Royal 8vo, original covers,
uncut edges._

One of sixty copies printed.


GALE, NORMAN.--Anemones, a collection of simple songs from Unleavened
Bread, Primulas and Pansies, Marsh Marigolds, with Fresh Flowers from
the Author's Garden   Rugby: George E. Over . . . 1889. _Royal 8vo,
original covers, uncut edges._

One of sixty copies printed.


GALE, NORMAN.--Meadowsweet. By the author of Marsh Marigolds. Rugby:
printed by George E. Over, at the Rugby Press. [1889]   _12mo, original
covers, uncut edges._

No. 30 of fifty copies printed in red, black, and gold.


GALE, NORMAN.--Thistledown Essays whereof the tale is Six penned in the
Studies of Rusticus & one who is a Friend of his. Rugby: George E. Over
   1890. _Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

One of twenty-two large paper copies printed, with title printed in gold
and colour.


GALE, NORMAN.--Cricket Songs and other trifling verses penned by one of
the Authors of "Thistledown." . . . Rugby: George E. Over. 1890. _Crown
8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

One of twenty large paper copies printed, in gold and green.


GALE, NORMAN.--Cricket Songs by Norman Gale. Methuen and Co., . . .
London 1894. _8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

No. 13 of fifteen copies printed on Japanese vellum paper.


GALE, NORMAN.--Here be Blue and White Violets from the garden wherein
grew Meadowsweet. Rugby: printed by George E. Over. [1891] _Crown 8vo,
original covers, uncut edges._

One of twenty-five large paper copies printed, with etched frontispiece
in two states, black and green; by Herbert Dicksee.


GALE, NORMAN.--Prince Redcheek. Printed by G. E. Over, at The Rugby
Press. [1891] _Post 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

Fifty copies printed.


GALE, NORMAN.--Gorillas   Rugby   Printed by George E. Over, The Rugby
Press. [1891] _Post 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

Sixty copies printed.


GALE, NORMAN.--A June Romance. Norman Gale. Rugby printed and published
by George E. Over. [1892] _12mo, original covers, uncut edges._

One of twenty-three large paper copies printed.


GALE, NORMAN.--A Country Muse by Norman R. Gale. London David Nutt . . .
[Rugby Press] 1892. _16mo, cloth, uncut edges._

Five hundred copies printed.


GALE, NORMAN.--A Country Muse. New Series by Norman R. Gale . . . London
David Nutt . . . 1893. _8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

One of seventy-five large paper copies printed.


GALE, NORMAN.--A Cotswold Village by Norman Gale   Fifteen copies
privately printed at the Rugby Press June 1893. _8vo, original covers,
uncut edges._

Presentation copy from the author, with autograph inscription.


GALE, HAYES, AND LE GALLIENNE.--A Fellowship in Song Alfred Hayes [From
Midland Meadows] Richard Le Gallienne [Nightingales] Norman Gale [A
Verdant County] Rugby George E. Over . . . 1893. _Post 8vo, original
covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


GALE, NORMAN.--Orchard Songs by Norman Gale. London. Elkin Mathews &
John Lane . . . 1893. _Post 8vo, vellum, uncut edges._

Special edition on hand-made paper, one hundred and fifty printed.


GALT, JOHN.--The Autobiography of John Galt . . . London: Cochrane and
M'Crone . . . 1833. _8vo, two volumes, half blue morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait of Galt by Graves after Irvine.


GAMBADO, GEOFFREY.--See Bunbury, H.


GAMMER GURTON'S GARLAND: or, the Nursery Parnassus. A choice collection
of pretty songs and verses, for the amusement of all little good
children who can neither read nor run. London: printed for R. Triphook,
. . . By Harding and Wright, . . . 1810. _8vo, tree calf, gilt back,
gilt edges, by Riviere._

On the verso of the title is a note: "Parts I. and II. were first
collected and printed by a literary gentleman deceased; who supposed he
had preserved each piece according to its original idiom: an opinion not
easily refuted, if worth supporting. Parts. III. and IV. are now first
added."


GAMMER GURTON'S GARLAND.--See Ritson, Joseph.


GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA.--See Vega, Garcilasso de la.


GARDEN, ALEXANDER.--Anecdotes of the Revolutionary War in America, with
Sketches of Character of Persons the most distinguished, in the Southern
States, for Civil and Military Services. By Alexander Garden.
Charleston: Printed for the Author   1822. _8vo, brown calf, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


GARDEN, ALEXANDER.--Anecdotes of the American Revolution, illustrative
of the Talents and Virtues of the Heroes and Patriots, who Acted the
Most Conspicuous Parts therein. By Alexander Garden. Second Series.
Charleston . . . A. E. Miller . . . 1828. _12mo, half red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._


GARNETT, RICHARD, _translator_.--Iphigenia in Delphi a dramatic poem
With Homer's "Shield of Achilles" and other Translations from the Greek
by Richard Garnett . . . T. Fisher Unwin . . . London . . . MDCCCXC.
_12mo, vellum, uncut edges._

No. 19 of thirty copies printed on Japan paper, with frontispiece.


GARNETT, RICHARD, _editor_.--Three hundred Notable Books added to the
Library of the British Museum under the keepership of Richard Garnett
1890-1899   Printed by T. and A. Constable for the Editors and
Subscribers   March M DCCC XCIX. _Royal 8vo, half red morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._

Portrait and woodcuts.


GARRICK, DAVID.--The Lying Valet; In Two Acts. As it is performed
gratis, At The Theatre in Goodman's-Fields. By D. Garrick. London:
Printed for and Sold by Paul Vaillant,. . . ; and J. Roberts, . . .
1742. (Price One Shilling.) _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Acted later at the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane. An
alteration of "All without Money," the second of Motteux's five plays
"The Novelty. Every Act a Play," 1697.

Half-title, title, and "Dramatis Personae," three leaves, and B-H1 in
fours.


GARRICK, DAVID.--Lethe. A dramatic satire. By David Garrick. As it is
Performed at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane, By His Majesty's Servants.
London: Printed for and Sold by Paul Vaillant, . . . M DCC XLIX. _8vo,
brown morocco, gilt edges, lower ones uncut, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.

Half-title and title, and B-G2 in fours.


GARRICK, DAVID.--The Gamesters: a comedy. Alter'd from Shirley. As it is
Perform'd, By His Majesty's Servants, at the Theatre-Royal in
Drury-Lane. London: Printed for J. and R. Tonson, . . . M DCC LVIII. . . .
_8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


GARRICK, DAVID.--The Farmer's Return from London. An Interlude. As it is
Performed at the Theatre Royal in Drury-Lane. London: Printed by Dryden
Leach, For J. and R. Tonson, in the Strand. MDCCLXII. _4to, brown levant
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition: frontispiece by James Basire after Hogarth. Written for
Mrs. Pritchard's benefit. Garrick took the part of the Farmer.

Half-title, A1, title, A2, and B-D in twos.


GARRICK, DAVID.--The Poetical Works of David Garrick, Esq. now first
collected . . . with Explanatory Notes. London: Printed for George
Kearsley, at Johnson's Head, Fleet-street, MDCCLXXXV. _Small 8vo, two
volumes, citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Joly._


GARRICK, DAVID.--The Dramatic Works of David Garrick, Esq. To which is
prefixed a Life of the Author . . . London: Printed for A. Millar . . .
MDCCXCVIII. _12mo, three volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._

Portrait of Garrick by W. Sharp, inserted, artist's proof.


GARRICK, DAVID.--See Colman and Garrick.


GASKELL, ELIZABETH CLEGHORN STEVENSON.--The Life of Charlotte Bronte . . .
By E. C. Gaskell . . . London: Smith, Elder & Co., . . . 1857. _Crown
8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Champs._

First edition, with portrait by Armytage. Certain passages were
afterwards suppressed because of statements challenged by persons
concerned.


GASKELL, ELIZABETH CLEGHORN STEVENSON.--Cranford [Knutsford] by Mrs.
Gaskell with a Preface by Anne Thackeray Ritchie and illustrations by
Hugh Thomson London Macmillan and Co. . . . 1891. _Royal 8vo, buckram,
uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


GAY, JOHN.--The Present State of Wit, in a Letter to a Friend in the
Country. London Printed in the Year, M DCC XI. (Price 3d.) _Small 8vo,
red straight-grain morocco, gilt fillets, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. The Letter is signed J. G. and dated Westminster, May 3,
1711. Contains half-title and Postscript, C4.


GAY, JOHN.--The Wife of Bath. A comedy. As it is Acted at the
Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane, by Her Majesty's Servants. By Mr. Gay . . .
London: Printed for Bernard Lintott, . . . MDCCXIII. _4to, half brown
levant morocco._

First edition. A-I in fours, half-title on A1, title on A2.


GAY, JOHN.--The Shepherd's Week. In six Pastorals. By Mr J. Gay . . .
London, Printed: And Sold by Ferd. Burleigh . . . MDCCXIV. _8vo, red
levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Seven plates by Lud. Du Guernier.


GAY, JOHN.--The Shepherd's Week. 1714. _8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt
back, side panels, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Large paper copy.


GAY, JOHN.--Trivia: or the Art of Walking the Streets of London. By Mr.
Gay . . . [device of crossed keys] London: Printed for Bernard Lintott,
. . . [n. d.] _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First edition: large and thick paper copy.

Three head-piece vignettes by Gribelin, and the device of the publisher
on the title-page. In the second edition, also n. d., the head-piece on
the first page, the view of a London street, is substituted for the
title device.


GAY, JOHN.--Trivia. [n. d.] _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._

Another issue of the first edition, and probably later, as the plates of
the tail-pieces appear to be worn. For the three engraved vignettes by
Gribelin on pages 1, 21, and 53--view of a London street, musical
instruments, and Pegasus rising into the clouds--woodcut headbands are
substituted, the first containing an eagle, the second two cherubs
supporting a basket of flowers, the third flowers and foliage.

The title and letter-press of the two issues are identical, and the
three errata on A2 verso are uncorrected.


GAY, JOHN.--(I.) Two Epistles; One, to the Right Honourable Richard Earl
of Burlington; The Other, to a Lady. By Mr. Gay. London, Printed for
Bernard Lintot, . . . Price 6d. [n. d.] (II.) An Epistle to a Lady,
Occasion'd by the Arrival of Her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales.
The Fifth Edition. London, Printed for Bernard Lintot, . . . [n. d.]
_8vo, red straight-grain morocco, gilt fillets, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

A2-D2 in eights, and two leaves of advertisement, D3 and D4, title on
A2.


GAY, JOHN.--Poems on Several Occasions. By Mr. John Gay. . . . London:
Printed for Jacob Tonson, . . . and Bernard Lintot, . . . M D CC XX.
_4to, two volumes in one, red morocco, gilt fillets on the side, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with frontispiece by W. Kent, and two other plates. The
pagination is continuous.


GAY, JOHN.--Poems on several occasions. By Mr. John Gay . . . London:
Printed for J. and R. Tonson, . . . MDCCLXVII. _12mo, two volumes, red
levant morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Large paper copy. Nine plates engraved by Fourdrinier and Isaac Taylor
after the designs of Du Guernier.


GAY, JOHN.--(I.) Fables. By Mr. Gay [mask vignette by P. F.] London:
Printed for J. Tonson and J. Watts. MDCCXXVII. (II.) Fables. By the late
Mr. Gay. Volume the Second. [vignette portrait] London: Printed for J.
and P. Knapton, in Ludgate-Street; and T. Cox, under the Royal-Exchange.
MDCCXXXVIII. _4to, two volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back, side
panels, gilt edges, by Riviere._

First edition.

Volume I contains a mask vignette on the title-page by Fourdrinier, an
introductory vignette and vignettes to each Fable (50) by Fourdrinier,
Van der Gucht, and others, from the designs of Kent and Wootton; Volume
II has a frontispiece by Scotin, the monument of Gay, a vignette of Gay
on the title-page by Scotin, and the illustrations (16) are full-page,
by the same engraver after the designs of Gravelot.


GAY, JOHN.--Fables by the late Mr. Gay. In one volume complete. London,
Printed for J. and R. Tonson, &c . . . MDCCLXVII. _Crown 8vo, two parts
in one volume, red levant morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Dedicated to William Duke of Cumberland. Frontispiece and sixty-seven
other plates.


GAY, JOHN.--Fables by John Gay. With a Life of the Author, and
embellished with seventy plates. London: Printed for John Stockdale . . .
1793. _Imperial 8vo, two volumes bound in one, green levant morocco,
back and sides richly ornamented in gold and mosaic, gilt edges, by
Riviere._

Twelve of the illustrations are by William Blake.


GAY, JOHN.--Fables. 1793. _Imperial 8vo, two volumes, citron levant
morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Another copy, 10-15/16 inches tall.


GAY, JOHN.--Fables by John Gay, with a Life of the Author, And
embellished with a Plate to each Fable. [vignette] London Printed by
Darton & Harvey, for F. & C. Rivington, . . . M DCC XCIII. _8vo, red
morocco, gilt back, narrow side borders, gilt edges, by C. Lewis._

Large paper copy, with frontispiece by G. Neagle, title-vignette and
thirty-four other plates, each with two illustrations, all proofs.


GAY AND MOORE.--Fables by John Gay, in two parts; to which are added
Fables by Edward Moore Paris, printed by P. Didot, the elder . . .
[1800] _16mo, green vellum, uncut edges._

One of two copies printed on vellum: from the collection of Junot, Duc
d'Abrantes.


GAY, JOHN.--Fables by Mr. John Gay with a Memoir by Austin Dobson.
London Kegan Paul, Trench & Co., . . . MDCCCLXXXII. _Crown 8vo, original
covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with a portrait.


GAY, JOHN.--The Beggar's Opera. As it is Acted at the Theatre-Royal in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields. Written by Mr. Gay . . . To which is Added, The
Musick Engrav'd on Copper-Plates. London: Printed for John Watts, . . .
MDCCXXVIII. [Price 1s. 6d.] _8vo, light brown levant morocco, gilt
edges._

First authorized edition. Two leaves, B-D in eights, E, four leaves, F,
one leaf, G and H, four leaves each.


GAY, JOHN.--The Beggar's Opera. As it is Acted at the Theatre-Royal in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields. Written by Mr. Gay . . . The Third Edition: With
the Overture in Score, The Songs, and the Basses, (The Ouverture and
Basses Compos'd by Dr. Pepusch) Curiously Engrav'd on Copper Plates.
London: Printed for John Watts, . . . MDCCXXIX. _4to, light brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Text: A-I2 in fours, Musical score, A-E4 in fours, F, two leaves, and G,
one leaf. Title printed in red and black on A1.


GAY, JOHN.--Polly: an Opera. Being the second part of the Beggar's
Opera. Written by Mr. Gay . . . London: Printed for the Author.
MDCCXXIX. _4to, light brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Riviere._

First edition.

Title printed in red and black and A-K in fours. Musical score, A-D in
fours.


GAY, JOHN.--Achilles. an Opera. As it is Perform'd at the Theatre-Royal
in Covent-Garden. [Two lines from Ovid, one from Horace] Written by the
late Mr. Gay. With the Musick prefix'd to each Song. London: Printed
for J. Watts . . . M DCC XXX III. Price One Shilling and Six Pence.
_8vo, red levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition. Half-title, A1; title, A2; text, A3-A4 and B-F2 in fours,
advertisements, F3-F4.


GAY, JOHN.--Achilles in Petticoats. an opera. As it is performed at the
Theatre-Royal, in Covent-Garden. . . . Written by Mr. Gay, with
alterations. The Music entirely new by Dr. Arne. London, Printed for W.
Strahan, T. Lowndes, T. Caslon, T. Becket, W. Nicoll, and R. Snagg. M
DCC LXXIV. _8vo, red straight-grain morocco, gilt fillets, gilt edges,
by The Club Bindery._

An alteration by George Colman of Gay's "Achilles," 1733. A-F3 in fours,
F4 blank, half-title on A1, title on A2.


GAY, JOHN.--The Distress'd Wife. A Comedy. By the late Mr. Gay,
author of the Beggar's Opera. London: Printed for Thomas Astley, . . .
1743. _8vo, red morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. A-L in fours, half-title on A1.


GAY, JOHN.

Plays written by Mr. John Gay,

viz.

  The Captives, a Tragedy.
  The Beggar's Opera.
  Polly, or, the Second Part of the Beggar's Opera.
  Achilles, an Opera.
  The Distress'd Wife, a Comedy.
  The Rehearsal at Goatham, a Farce.

To which is added, An Account of the Life and Writings of the Author.

London: Printed for J. and R. Tonson, . . . M DCC LX. _Crown 8vo, red
levant morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition: with portrait.


GAY, JOHN.--Plays written by M^{r} John Gay, viz. The Captives, a tragedy.
The Beggar's Opera. Polly, or the Second Part of the Beggar's Opera.
Achilles, an opera. The Distress'd Wife, a comedy. The Rehearsal at
Gotham, a farce. To which is prefixed an Account of the Life and
Writings of the Author. London: Printed for W. Strahan . . . MDCCLXXII.
_12mo, calf, gilt back._

Second edition. Portrait, with quotation from Martial beneath it.


GAY, JOHN.--The Miscellaneous Works of M^{r} John Gay. London. Printed for
John Bell . . . MDCCLXXIII. _12mo, six volumes, sprinkled calf, gilt
back, yellow edges, by Bedford._

Frontispiece engraved by Fourdrinier, portrait, etc. Sub-titles as
follows:

Vol. I. Poems on Several Occasions. By Mr. John Gay, Lintot and Tonson,
1753.

II. The same, 1752.

IV. Plays written by Mr. John Gay. Life and a portrait. W. Strahan &c,
1772.

VI. Fables by the late Mr. Gay: 56 illustrations, W. Strahan, 1772.


GAY, JOHN.--Gay's Chair. Poems, never before printed, written by John
Gay, author of the Beggar's Opera, Fables, &c. with a sketch of his
life, from the MSS. of the Rev. Joseph Baller his nephew. Edited by
Henry Lee, author of Poetic Impressions, Caleb Quotem, &c. To which are
added Two New Tales, the World, and Gossip, by the editor. London:
Longman, . . . 1820. _Small 8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

The original MS. of Baller's Life of Gay, and the commission as
Lieutenant of Gay's elder brother Jonathan (signed by the Duke of
Marlborough), are inserted in this volume, also MSS. of "The Maid's
Petition" and "Answer to a Predestinarian," the former said to be in the
handwriting of Gay.


GAY, JOHN.--The Poetical Works of John Gay. With a Life of the Author by
Dr. Johnson. Boston: Little, Brown and Company . . . M.DCCCLIV. _16mo,
two volumes, green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Matthews._

Portrait of Gay in oval.


GAY, JOHN.--The Poetical Works of John Gay. With a Memoir [by Samuel
Johnson] Boston: Little, Brown, and Company 1866. _8vo, two volumes,
green levant morocco, gilt back with purple mosaic, gilt top, uncut
edges, by David._

No. 13 of one hundred copies printed on large paper.

Portrait of Gay, proof on India paper, and (inserted) a series of
thirty-three outline illustrations engraved by Muss for an edition of
Gay's Fables that was never published; also two portraits of Gay and ten
other proof plates, one in four states.


GAY, JOHN.--The Poetical Works of John Gay edited with a life and notes
by John Underhill . . . London: Lawrence and Bullen . . . 1893. _Post
8vo, two volumes, half vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait. No. 96 of two hundred copies printed on large paper.


GAY, JOHN.--See Pope, Alexander. Miscellaneous Poems. 1712. Swift,
Jonathan. Miscellanies, 1742.


"GAY, JOSEPH."--See Breval, John Durant.


GAY, SYDNEY HOWARD.--See Bryant, William Cullen. 1876-1881.


GED, WILLIAM.--Biographical Memoirs of William Ged; including a
particular account of his progress in the Art of Block-Printing. London,
printed by and for J. Nichols. MDCCLXXXI. _8vo, calf, gilt back._

First edition: edited by J. Nichols.

Ged was the inventor of stereotype printing in Great Britain, and his
efforts to introduce the art brought nothing but ruin. Foules and Mack
were engaged at the time on a similar plan, which they had to abandon.


GED, WILLIAM.--Biographical Memoirs of William Ged; including a
particular account of his progress in the art of Block Printing.
Newcastle: printed by S. Hodgson, . . . M DCCC XIX. _8vo, russia, gilt
back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

One hundred and sixty copies printed. Woodcut frontispiece-title. Edited
by Thomas Hodgson.


GELL, SIR WILLIAM AND JOHN P. GANDY.--Pompeiana: the Topography,
Edifices, and Ornaments of Pompeii. By Sir William Gell . . . and John
P. Gandy . . . London: printed for Rodwell and Martin 1817-1819. _4to,
red levant morocco, gilt back panels, side corners, gilt edges, by F.
Bedford._

Large paper copy of the First Series. The charming head-pieces are
duplicated on separate sheets, proofs on India paper, the large plates
are in two states, the unfinished etching and the finished plate,
generally on India, and the frescoes are duplicated in colour.


GELL, SIR WILLIAM.--Pompeiana: the Topography, Edifices and Ornaments of
Pompeii, the Result of Excavations since 1819. By Sir William Gell . . .
London: Jennings and Chaplin   MDCCCXXXII. _4to, two volumes, red levant
morocco, gilt back panels, side corners, gilt edges, by F. Bedford._

Only twenty-five copies were printed in this form, and of these only a
portion were absolutely perfected. The portrait and other engravings in
this Second Series are in two states, both on India paper, the first
being the engraver's etching before all letters.


GENERAL CASHIERED.--The General Cashier'd: a Play, As Design'd for
the Stage. Humbly Inscrib'd to His Highness Prince Eugene of Savoy.
London: Printed for J. Baker, . . . 1712. (Price 1s. 6d.) _4to, green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, some lower ones uncut, by
Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A2-K3 in fours, title on A2.


GENEST, JOHN.--Some Account of the English Stage, from the Restoration
in 1660 to 1830. . . . Bath: printed by H. E. Carrington. . . . 1832.
_8vo, ten volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._


GERMAN NOVELISTS, THE.--See Roscoe, Thomas.


GESSNER, SALOMON.--The Death of Abel in five books attempted From the
German of M^{r}. Gessner. London, Published Jan^{y}. 7^{th}. 1797. by T.
Heptinstall . . . [Printed by C. Whittingham] _Royal 8vo, boards, uncut
edges._

Large paper copy, with portrait, engraved title, and four plates by
Blackberd after Stothard.

Following "The Death of Abel" are "New Idyls, by S. Gessner. With a
Letter to M. Fuslin, on Landscape Painting; and The Two Friends of
Bourbon, a moral tale, by M. Diderot," with two plates, also by
Blackberd after Stothard.


GHOST.--The Surprizing Appearance of a Ghost, With the Message he
brought from the unseen and eternal World: being A brief Paraphrase and
Improvement, (agreeable to our Time and Day) on the 4th. Chap. of Job,
the 13^{th}, 14^{th}, 15^{th}, 16^{th}, 17^{th}, 18^{th}, 19^{th},
20^{th}, & 21^{st} Verses. viz. I. On the Appearance of a Spirit to
Eliphaz. II. On the Holiness and Justice of God, and the Pride and
Imperfection of Man: (Ver. 17.) III. On the Distrust of God towards his
rational Creatures, more especially Man: (Ver. 18, 19.) IV. On the
Destruction of Man, occasioned by Mortality: (Ver. 20.) V. On the
Excellency of Man; and it's Defects, without true Wisdom: (Ver. 21) VI.
A Poem on the Day of Judgment: VII. Another, on the transcendent Joys
of Heaven. Boston: Printed by Fowle and Draper, . . . 1759. _12mo, brown
levant morocco, gilt back and sides, uncut edges, in a blue levant
morocco case, by Riviere._


GIBBON, EDWARD.--The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire. By Edward Gibbon. Oxford, Talbays and Wheeler; and William
Pickering, London   MDCCCXXVII. _Royal 8vo, eight volumes, red levant
morocco, Janseniste, gilt over uncut edges, by Brany._

One of fifty large paper copies, with proof portraits and frontispieces
added.


GIBBONS, THOMAS.--Britannia's Alarm: a poem, Occasioned by the Present
Rebellion. To which is added, a Fable of the Vine and Bramble. By Thomas
Gibbons. . . . London: Printed for R. King, . . . J. Buckland, and M.
Cooper . . . and M. Marshal . . . M DCC XLV. . . . _Small 8vo, paper
wrappers, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with half-title. Presentation copy from the author, with
inscription on the title-page.


GIBBONS, THOMAS.--An Elegy on the Death Of the Reverend Mr. Peter
Goodwin, who departed this life November 27, 1747. in the LXIVth year of
his Age. By Thomas Gibbons. . . . London: Printed for J. Oswald, . . . M
DCC XLVIII. _Small 8vo, paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._

Title in a mourning border, and mourning bands at the beginning and end
of the poem.


GIBSON, STRICKLAND.--Early Oxford Bindings by Strickland Gibson [40
plates] Printed for the Bibliographical Society at the Oxford University
Press January 1903. _4to, original paper covers, uncut edges._


GIFT, THE.--See Leslie, Eliza.


GILBERT, DAVIES, _editor_.--Some Ancient Christmas Carols, with the
tunes to which they were formerly sung in the West of England. Collected
by Davies Gilbert, . . . London: printed by John Nichols and Son, . . .
1822. _8vo, half olive morocco, gilt top, uncut edges. Bound with HONE'S
"Ancient Mysteries" and one other work._

First edition.


GILBERT, JOSIAH.--Cadore or Titian's Country. By Josiah Gilbert, . . .
London: Longmans, Green, and Co. 1869. _Imperial 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

Thirty-five plates and nine woodcuts in the text.


GILCHRIST, ALEXANDER.--Life of William Etty, R. A. By Alexander
Gilchrist, . . . London: David Bogue, . . . MDCCCLV. _Small 8vo, two
volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._


GILCHRIST, ALEXANDER.--Life of William Blake, "pictor ignotus." With
selections from his poems and other writings by the late Alexander
Gilchrist, . . . illustrated from Blake's own works, in facsimile by W.
J. Linton, and in photolithography; with a few of Blake's original
plates. London. . . : Macmillan and Co. 1863. _8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


GILCHRIST, ALEXANDER.--Life of William Blake with selections from his
poems and other writings by Alexander Gilchrist . . . a new and enlarged
edition illustrated from Blake's own works with additional letters and a
memoir of the author . . . London Macmillan and Co. 1880. _8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

In this edition the full-page illustrations are printed on India paper.


GILLISS, WALTER.--The Story of a Motto and a Mark   being a brief sketch
of a few printers' "marks" and containing the facts concerning the mark
of the Gilliss Press   by Walter Gilliss. New York The Gilliss Press   M
C M II. _12mo, vellum boards, uncut edges._

One of twelve copies printed on French vellum paper. Presentation copy
from the author.


GILLMAN, JAMES.--The Life of Samuel Taylor Coleridge. By James Gillman.
London, William Pickering   1838. _8vo, red levant morocco, back panels
in gilt and blue mosaic, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

Only Volume I was published.


GIOVANNI.--The Pecorone of Ser Giovanni now first translated into
English by W. G. Waters illustrated by E. R. Hughes, . . . London:
Laurence and Bullen, . . . M DCCC XC VII. _4to, half vellum, uncut
edges._

No. 55 of one hundred and ten copies printed on Japanese vellum, with
twelve plates.


GLANVILLE, JOHN.--Variety; or Poetical Prolusions. By John Glanville . . .
London: printed for the author, by G. Sidney . . . 1811. _8vo, boards,
uncut edges._

The author in his preface states that the best of this "variety" is from
"the glowing pen of Mr. Samuel Blake Frome." A frontispiece is prefixed.


GLOVER, RICHARD.--Leonidas, a poem, by Richard Glover. Adorned with
plates. . . . The sixth edition. London: Printed by T. Bensley; for F.
J. Du Roveray, . . . 1798. _8vo, two volumes, green levant morocco, gilt
fillets on the back, side borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Large paper copy.

Frontispiece-portrait by Fittler from a drawing by Burney after a
portrait by Hone, with proof on India paper added, and six other plates,
by Bartolozzi after W. Hamilton, Delatre after Burney, and J. Neagle,
Holloway, and J. Heath after Stothard, with proofs of the Bartolozzi
and Holloway engravings added. Five other plates have been inserted, two
by P. W. Tomkins after Tresham, both of them in three states; two by C.
Warren after J. Thurston, two states; and one by Smith after Thurston,
in two states.


GODWIN, MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT.--A Vindication of the Rights of Woman: with
Strictures on political and moral Subjects. By Mary Wollstonecraft.
London: printed for J. Johnson . . . 1792. _8vo, half brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition. Two portraits of the author are inserted, one a proof on
India paper, by Heath after Opie.


GODWIN, MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT.--Defense des Droits des Femmes, suivie de
quelques Considerations sur des sujets politiques et moraux. Ouvrage
traduit de l'Anglais de Mary Wollstonecraft . . . A Paris, chez Buisson
. . . 1792. _8vo, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges._


GODWIN, MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT.--Original Stories, from real life; with
conversations, calculated to regulate the affections, and form the mind
to truth and goodness. London: Printed for J. Johnson, . . . M. DCC.
LXXXVIII. _12mo, brown straight-grain morocco, gilt back, side corners,
gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


GODWIN, MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT.--Original Stories from Real Life; with
Conversations, calculated to Regulate the Affections, and form the mind
to truth and goodness. By Mary Wollstonecraft. A new edition. London:
printed for J. Johnson, . . . 1796. _12mo, half brown morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Illustrated with six plates designed and engraved by William Blake.


GODWIN, MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT.--Maria, ou le malheur d'etre femme, ouvrage
posthume de Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin: imite de l'anglais par B.
Ducos. A Paris, Chez Maradan, . . . An VI-1798. _12mo, half green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


GODWIN, MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT.--Posthumous Works of the Author of a
Vindication of the Rights of Woman . . . London: Printed for J. Johnson,
. . . and G. G. and J. Robinson, . . . 1798. _Small 8vo, four volumes,
half blue morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


GODWIN, MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT.--A Defence of the Character and Conduct of
the late Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin, founded on principles of Nature and
Reason, as applied to the peculiar circumstances of her case; in a
series of letters to A Lady . . . London: printed for James Wallis, . . .
By Slatter and Munday, Oxford. 1803. _Small 8vo, half brown morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


GODWIN, WILLIAM.--Memoirs of the Author of a Vindication of the Rights
of Woman. By William Godwin. London: printed for J. Johnson, . . . and
G. G. and J. Robinson, . . . 1798. _Small 8vo, green straight-grain
morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Portrait of Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin by Heath after Opie.


GODWIN, WILLIAM.--Mandeville. A Tale of the Seventeenth century in
England. By William Godwin. . . . In three volumes. . . . Edinburgh:
printed for Archibald Constable and Co. and Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme,
and Brown, London. 1817. _12mo, three volumes, half brown levant
morocco, gilt back, brown figured silk sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition. The dedication to John Philpot Curran is dated October
25, 1817.


GOETHE, JOHANN WOLFGANG VON.--Faustus, A Dramatic Mystery; the Bride of
Corinth; the First Walpurgis Night. Translated from the German of
Goethe, and illustrated with notes, by John Anster, . . . London:
printed for Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, Green, & Longman, . . .
1835.[-1864.] _Crown 8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by
F. Bedford._


GOETHE, JOHANN WOLFGANG VON.--(I.) Faust: A Tragedy, By J. Wolfgang von
Goethe. Translated into English verse By J. Birch . . . [Embellished
with twenty-nine engravings on steel, after Moritz Retszch.] London:
Black and Armstrong. . . . MDCCCXXXIX. (II.) Faust: a tragedy, in two
parts, . . . The second part. Translated into English verse, By Jonathan
Birch, . . . Embellished with eleven engravings on steel, By John Brain,
after Moritz Retszch. London: Chapman and Hall, . . . MDCCCXLIII. _Royal
8vo, original cloth, uncut edges._


GOETHE, JOHANN WOLFGANG VON.--Faust: a dramatic poem, by Goethe.
Translated into English verse by Theodore Martin. William Blackwood and
Sons, Edinburgh and London. [Whittingham Press.] MDCCCLXV. _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


GOETHE, JOHANN WOLFGANG VON.--Reynard the Fox after the German version
of Goethe by Thomas James Arnold . . . London, Nattali and Bond, . . .
1855. _8vo, citron morocco, back and sides covered with tooling in a
geometrical design, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Engraved frontispiece-title, with the imprint, "William Pickering,
1853," and twelve steel plates after the designs of Joseph Wolf.


GOETHE, JOHANN WOLFGANG VON.--Poems and Ballads of Goethe. Translated by
W. Edmondstoune Aytoun, D.C.L. and Theodore Martin. Second Edition
William Blackwood and Sons: Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLX. _Post 8vo, calf,
gilt back._


GOETHE, JOHANN WOLFGANG VON.--[First page] Goethe's Helena. Translated
by Theodore Martin. [n. p., n. d.] _Crown 8vo, half brown straight-grain
morocco, gilt top._

Thirty-one pages of text, with no title-page, date, or place of
publication. Presentation copy from the Translator, with inscription on
the first page.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER, _translator_.--The Memoirs of a Protestant, Condemned
to the Galleys of France, For His Religion. Written by Himself.
Comprehending an Account of the various Distresses he suffered in
Slavery; and his Constancy in supporting almost every Cruelty that
bigotted zeal could inflict or Human Nature sustain; also a
Description of the Galleys, and the Service in which they are
employed. The Whole interspersed with Anecdotes relative to the
General History of the Times, for a Period of Thirteen Years; during
which the Author continued in Slavery, 'till he was at last set
free, at the Intercession of the Court of Great Britain. In two
volumes. . . . Translated from the Original, just published at the
Hague, By James Willington. [Oliver Goldsmith] London: Printed for R.
Griffiths, . . . and E. Dilly, . . . M. DCC. LVIII. _12mo, two volumes,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

These are the Memoirs of Jean Marteilhe of Bergerac. Goldsmith took the
name of James Willington, an old classmate at Trinity College, from
"prudential motives," and the book is actually a translation.

Inserted is a receipt dated Jan. 11, 1758, and signed Oliver Goldsmith,
to the effect that he received of Mr. Edward Dilly L6. 13. 4 for his
third share of Goldsmith's translation of the book.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Bee. Being Essays on the most Interesting
Subjects . . . London: Printed for J. Wilkie, . . . MDCCLIX. _Small 8vo,
brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, by Ramage. Bound with
DODSLEY'S "OEconomy of Human Life."_

First edition, issued in eight numbers, from October 6 to November 24,
1759.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--An Enquiry into the present state of Polite Learning
in Europe. [vignette] London:   Printed for R. and J. Dodsley, . . .
M.DCC.LIX. _Small 8vo, red niger skin, gilt back, wide side borders,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, entirely uncut. Inserted is an autograph letter from
Goldsmith to John Dodsley, dated Gray's Inn, March 10, 1764, and asking
for ten guineas "as a favour."


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--An Enquiry into the present state of Polite Learning
in Europe. By Oliver Goldsmith, M.B. The second edition, Revised and
Corrected. London: Printed for J. Dodsley, . . . M DCC LXXIV. _8vo, red
niger skin, gilt back, wide side borders, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Mystery Revealed; Containing a Series of
Transactions and Authentic Testimonials, Respecting the supposed
Cock-Lane Ghost; Which have hitherto been concealed from the Public . . .
London: Printed for W. Bristow, . . . MDCCXLII. [MDCCLXII] _8vo, brown
levant morocco, gilt back, rich side ornaments, gilt edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

First edition. The date 1742 is a typographical error; it should be
1762, the LX being transposed. Forster, in his Life of Goldsmith, states
that this pamphlet "has not survived"--a sufficient proof of its rarity.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Art of Poetry on a new plan: Illustrated with
a great Variety of Examples from the best English Poets; and of
Translations from the Ancients: Together with such Reflections and
critical Remarks as may tend to form in our Youth an elegant Taste, and
render the Study of this Part of the Belles Lettres more rational and
pleasing. London: Printed for J. Newbery, . . . M DCC LXII. _12mo, two
volumes, calf, gilt and mosaic back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition. Frontispiece engraved by Ant. Walker.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Life of Richard Nash, Of Bath, Esq; Extracted
principally from His Original Papers. . . . London: Printed for J.
Newbery, . . . and W. Frederick, at Bath. MDCCLXII. _8vo, maroon levant
morocco, gilt back, side panels, doubled with blue morocco, wide borders
of architectural design, gilt top, uncut edges, by Meunier._

Portrait by A. Walker after a painting by Hoare, and two final leaves of
advertisement.

Not republished in the Miscellaneous Works.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Citizen of the World; or Letters from a Chinese
Philosopher, Residing in London, to his Friends in the East. . . .
London: Printed for the Author; and Sold by J. Newbery and W. Bristow,
in St. Paul's Church-yard; J. Leake and W. Frederick, at Bath; B.
Collins, at Salisbury; and A. M. Smart and Co. at Reading. M DCC LXII.
_12mo, two volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back, side
borders and centre ornaments, doubled with blue silk, gilt borders, silk
guards, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Presumably the first issue of the first edition, "Printed for the
Author." These letters were first published in the "Ledger."


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Citizen of the World; or Letters from a Chinese
Philosopher, Residing in London, to his Friends in the East. . . .
London: Printed for J. Newbery, . . . MDCC LXII. _12mo, two volumes,
brown morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Presumably the second issue of the first edition. The same sheets as the
first issue, with a new title-page.


[GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.]--The History of England, in a series of letters
from a nobleman to his son. . . . London, Printed for J. Newbery, . . .
M DCC LXIV. _12mo, two volumes, red straight-grain morocco, gilt edges,
by The Club Bindery._

Sometimes attributed to the Earl of Orrery and to George Lord Lytelton.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The History of England, from The Earliest Times to
the Death of George II. By Dr. Goldsmith. . . . London, Printed for T.
Davies, . . . M DCC LXX I. _8vo, four volumes, red morocco, uncut edges,
by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Traveller, or a Prospect of Society. A Poem.
Inscribed to the Rev. Mr. Henry Goldsmith. By Oliver Goldsmith, M.B.
London: Printed for J. Newbery, in St. Paul's Church-yard. MDCCLXV.
_4to, light green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First edition.

Collation: Half-title, A1 (verso blank). Title, A2 (verso blank). "To
the Rev. Henry Goldsmith," signed "Your most affectionate Brother,"
a1-a2. Pages i-iv. Poem, B1-G1 in twos. Pages 1-22. Advertisement, G2.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Traveller. 1765. _4to, citron levant morocco,
gilt and mosaic back, scroll border of green and red mosaic on the
sides, foliage and pointille tooling, doubled with citron morocco,
yellow figured silk guards, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy of the first edition, with inserted portrait of Goldsmith
after Sir Joshua Reynolds.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Traveller, or a Prospect of Society. A Poem.
Inscribed to the Rev. Mr. Henry Goldsmith. By Oliver Goldsmith, M. B.
The second edition. London: Printed for J. Newbury, in St. Pauls
Church-yard. M DCC LXV. _4to, green levant morocco, side borders,
doubled with green morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

This is not a new issue of the date 1765, but a new edition. The type is
lighter faced, and occasional changes of phraseology occur, e.g., line
12, page 3, in the first edition, "Amidst the store, 't were
thankless to repine" here reads "Amidst the store, should
thankless pride repine?"

On the half-title is the inscription, "with the Author's best esteem."

Collation: Half-title, A1 (verso blank). Title, A2 (verso blank).
Dedication, a1-a2. Poem, B1-G2 (verso blank) in twos. Pages 1-23.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--Essays. By M^{r}. Goldsmith. Collecta revirescunt.
[vignette] London: Printed for W. Griffin in Fetter Lane, M DCCLXV.
_12mo, Spanish calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

One of two editions printed in 1765, with engraved title-page.

Collation: Title designed and engraved by Isaac Taylor, one leaf (verso
blank). Preface, A1-A4. (verso blank). Text, twenty-seven Essays, B1-L10
in twelves. Pages 1-236.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--Essays. By Mr. Goldsmith. Collecta revirescunt.
London: Printed for W. Griffin, in Fetter-Lane. MDCCLXV. _12mo, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, partly untrimmed, by Riviere_.

Portrait, engraved by Scott, inserted. One of two editions printed in
1765. The Preface occupies one leaf instead of four, as in the preceding
edition, and the signatures are in sixes instead of twelves. The type
throughout is smaller, making the text occupy 187 pages instead of 236.

Collation: Title with woodcut ornament of two horns of plenty, between
which is a face surrounded by rays of light, one leaf (verso blank).
Preface, one leaf. Text, twenty-seven Essays, B1-R4 (verso blank) in
sixes. Pages 1-187.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--Essays by M^{r}. Goldsmith. Collecta revirescunt.
London. Printed for I. & F. Rivington, . . . MDCCLXXV. _12mo, orange
levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Smith-Mansell._

Engraved title-page.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Vicar of Wakefield: a tale. Supposed to be
written by Himself . . . Salisbury: Printed by B. Collins, For F.
Newbery, in Pater-Noster-Row, London. MDCCLXVI. _12mo, two volumes,
original calf, gilt back, side border._

First edition; the second was printed in London in the same year.

Presentation copy "from the Author."


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Vicar of Wakefield. A Tale . . . By Dr.
Goldsmith . . . London: printed by Sammells and Ritchie, for E. Harding,
. . . and J. Good, . . . MDCCXCII. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back
and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Three inserted portraits of Goldsmith and six plates by Stothard, all
proofs.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Vicar of Wakefield; a tale, by Doctor Goldsmith.
Illustrated with twenty-four [coloured] designs, by Thomas Rowlandson . . .
London: published by R. Ackermann, . . . 1823. _Royal 8vo, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Cuzin._


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Vicar of Wakefield. A tale. By Oliver Goldsmith,
M.D. With [2] illustrations by George Cruikshank. . . . London: James
Cochrane and Co., . . . 1832. _Post 8vo, half maroon levant morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges, by V. Krafft._

Portrait by Freeman after Sir Joshua Reynolds.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Vicar of Wakefield. By Oliver Goldsmith. With
thirty-two illustrations, by William Mulready, . . . London: John Van
Voorst . . . MDCCCXLIII. _Small 4to, cloth, uncut edges._


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Vicar of Wakefield. 1843. _Small 4to, blue
levant morocco, rich gilt back and sides, doubled with red morocco, wide
dentelle borders, gilt over uncut edges, by Bedford._

Another copy, extra-illustrated by the insertion of a duplicate set of
the Mulready illustrations, engraved by Thompson, proofs on India paper,
Stothard's plates (proofs), the Johannot plates (India proofs), etc.,
seventy-seven inserted plates in all, the majority proof impressions.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Vicar of Wakefield. by Oliver Goldsmith. With
thirty-two illustrations, by William Mulready, R. A. London: John van
Vorst, . . . MDCCCLV. _4to, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Riviere._


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Vicar of Wakefield a Tale. By Oliver Goldsmith.
Illustrated by George Thomas. London: published for Joseph Cundall
MDCCCLV. _8vo, red morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Hayday._

Forty woodcut illustrations, and numerous head-pieces, etc., by T.
Macquoid.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--Le Vicaire de Wakefield . . . par Goldsmith, traduit
en Francais avec le texte Anglais en regard, par Charles Nodier . . .
precede d'une Notice par le meme sur la vie et les ouvrages de
Goldsmith, et suivi de quelques Notes. Paris, Bourgueleret . . . 1858.
_8vo, blue calf, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Bauzonnet._

Portrait of Goldsmith and ten plates by Tony Johannot, proofs before
letters, also numerous woodcut illustrations.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Vicar of Wakefield. By Oliver Goldsmith. New
York: Frank H. Dodd, . . . 1865. _16mo, half blue straight-grain
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--Le Vicaire de Wakefield par Olivier Goldsmith.
Traduction de M. Aignan revue par Remond. Illustrations anglaises par M.
Georges Thomas. Fleurons et vignettes par M. Macquoid. Paris, Delarue
[n. d.] _Square 8vo, green morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges._

Printed on rose-tinted paper.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Vicar of Wakefield By Oliver Goldsmith with
prefatory memoir by George Saintsbury And One Hundred and fourteen
Coloured Illustrations [coloured vignette] London John C. Nimmo . . .
1886. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, by Stikeman._

Extra-illustrated by the insertion of a portrait, proof before letters,
and eleven plates, including the series by A. Revel after Tony Johannot.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Vicar of Wakefield By Oliver Goldsmith with a
Preface by Austin Dobson and Illustrations by Hugh Thomson   London
Macmillan & Co . . . MDCCCXC. _Royal 8vo, buckram, uncut edges._

Large paper copy of the first issue, with the suppressed woodcut on page
95.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Beauties of English Poesy. Selected by Oliver
Goldsmith . . . London: Printed for William Griffin, . . . 1767. _12mo,
two volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by
Smith-Mansell._

First edition.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Good Natur'd Man: a Comedy. As Performed at the
Theatre Royal in Covent-Garden. By Mr. Goldsmith. London: Printed for W.
Griffin . . . MDCCLXVIII. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, side
borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Title, Preface, and Prologue by Dr. Johnson, three
leaves. Text, B-L1 in fours, Epilogue, L2.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Roman History, From the Foundation of the City
of Rome, To the Destruction of the Western Empire. By Dr. Goldsmith. . . .
London: Printed for S. Baker and G. Leigh, &c . . . M DCC LXIX. _8vo,
two volumes, red morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Life of Henry St. John, Lord Viscount
Bolingbroke. London: Printed for T. Davies, . . . 1770. _8vo, red niger
skin, gilt back, side panels, doubled with olive silk, silk guards,
uncut edges, with the original blue wrappers bound in, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Life of Thomas Parnell, D. D. Archdeacon of
Clogher. Compiled from original papers and memoirs: in which are
included several letters Of Mr. Pope, Mr. Gay, Dr. Arbuthnot, &c. &c. By
Dr. Goldsmith. London: Printed for T. Davies, . . . M DCC LXX. _8vo, red
levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Deserted Village, a poem. By Dr.
Goldsmith. London: Printed for W. Griffin, at Garrick's Head, in
Catharine-street, Strand. . . . MDCCLXX. _Small 8vo, boards, uncut
edges, in brown levant morocco case, gilt back, floral ornament on the
sides._

Second issue of the first octavo edition, with the misprint "head," page
9, line 1, corrected to "hand."

The poem was issued in two sizes in 1770, octavo and quarto, but it
cannot be absolutely determined which was the first edition. The former
is without question by far the rarer, and as there is an issue of this
edition containing the misprint "head," which is not found in the
quarto, it is fair to suppose that the octavo is the earlier.

Collation: Half-title, "The Deserted Village," A1 (verso blank). Title,
A2 (verso blank). Dedication to Sir Joshua Reynolds, A3. Text, A4-B6 in
sixes. Pages i-vi. and 7-24.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Deserted Village, a poem. By Dr
Goldsmith. London: Printed for W. Griffin, at Garrick's Head, in
Catharine-street, Strand. M DCC LXX. _Small 8vo, green levant morocco,
rich gilt back and wide side borders, doubled with green morocco,
borders, green silk guards, uncut edges, with the original wrappers
bound in, by The Club Bindery._

Another 8vo edition of 1770, entirely reset, with larger type and
different ornaments. The type on the title-page is much narrower faced,
the period after "poem" is raised above the line, and there is no period
after "Dr." The dedication is preceded by a band of small printer's
ornaments, terminating at each side in a fleur-de-lis. In the other
edition, two parallel lines, the upper one the heavier, precede the
dedication. As in the other edition, the misprint "head," page 9, line
1, is corrected to "hand."

Collation: The same as the preceding edition.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Deserted Village, a poem. By Dr. Goldsmith
[vignette "The sad historian of the pensive plain," by Isaac
Taylor] London: Printed for W. Griffin, at Garrick's Head, in
Catharine-street, Strand. M DCC LXX. _4to, blue levant morocco, gilt
and mosaic back, sides decorated with interlaced mosaic ribbon design in
compartments, doubled with blue morocco, borders, red silk guards, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

An unusually large and entirely uncut copy of the first quarto edition.
The misprint "head," page 3, line 7, is corrected to "hand."

Collation: Half-title, "The Deserted Village. [Price 2s.]," A1 (verso
blank). Title, with vignette, A2 (verso blank). Dedication to Sir Joshua
Reynolds, A3-A4 (verso blank). Text, B1-B4 and D1-G2 (verso blank) in
twos. Pages 1-23.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Deserted Village. 1770. _4to, green levant
morocco, gilt back, side borders, doubled with green morocco, borders,
silk guards, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Another copy, somewhat taller than the preceding.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Deserted Village. By Oliver Goldsmith.
Illustrated by the Etching Club. London: published for Joseph Cundall . . .
MDCCCLVII. _Small 4to, green morocco, gilt back and side panels,
gilt edges, by Hayday._

Thirty-five woodcut illustrations, drawn from the original etchings by
E. K. Johnson, and engraved by Harral, Bolton, and Cooper.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--She Stoops to Conquer: or, The Mistakes of a Night.
A Comedy. As it is acted at the Theatre-Royal in Covent-Garden. Written
by Doctor Goldsmith. London: Printed for F. Newbery . . . MDCCLXXIII.
_8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back, doubled with citron morocco with
rich gold frame, gilt over rough edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First issue of the first edition, with the numerous errors in pagination
and the absence of Diggory (Mr. Saunders) from the Dramatis Personae.

Collation: Title, A1 (verso blank). Dedication "To Samuel Johnson, LL
D," signed "Your most sincere friend, And admirer, Oliver
Goldsmith," A2 recto. Prologue by David Garrick, A2 verso and A3 recto.
Epilogue by Goldsmith, A3 recto and verso. Epilogue by J. Craddock, A4
(verso Dramatis Personae). Text, B1-P1 in fours. Pages 1-74 (65
misprinted 56), 83, 68-69, 86-87, 72-73, 90-91, 76-77, 94-95, 80, and
97-114.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--She Stoops to Conquer: or The Mistakes of a Night. A
Comedy. As it is acted at the Theatre-Royal in Covent-Garden. Written by
Doctor Goldsmith. London: Printed for F. Newbery, in St. Paul's
Church-Yard. MDCCLXXIII. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by Riviere._

Second issue of the first edition, with the pagination corrected.

The title-page and text are the same sheets as in the first issue, but
the preliminary matter has been reset, possibly also the Epilogue, and
Diggory's name added to the Dramatis Personae, from which it was omitted
by mistake in the first issue.

Collation: Title, one leaf (verso blank). Dedication to Dr. Johnson,
Prologue, Epilogue, and Dramatis Personae, two leaves. Text, B1-P1 in
fours. Epilogue, P2 (verso blank). Pages 1-106, last leaf unnumbered.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--Retaliation: a poem. By Doctor Goldsmith. including
epitaphs on the most Distinguished Wits of this Metropolis.
[vignette portrait of Goldsmith] London: Printed for G. Kearsly, . . .
M. DCC. LXXIV. _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt
edges, by Riviere_.

First edition: published posthumously.

In the first collected edition of the "Poems and Plays," 1777, the
following note appears on the verso of the half-title of this poem:

"Dr. Goldsmith and some of his friends occasionally dined at the St.
James's coffee-house.--One day it was proposed to write epitaphs on
him. His country, dialect, and person, furnished subjects of
witticism. He was called on for Retaliation, and at their next
meeting, produced the following poem."

Collation: Half-title, A1 (verso blank). Title with medallion portrait,
A2 (verso blank). "To M^{r}. Kearsly, Book-seller, in Fleet-Street,"
B1-B2 (verso blank). Pages i-iii. Text, C1-E2 in twos. Pages 1-16.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--A Survey of Experimental Philosophy, Considered in
its present state of improvement.   Illustrated with cuts. . . . By
Oliver Goldsmith, M.B. London: Printed for T. Carnan and F. Newbery . . .
MDCCLXXVI. _8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, Janseniste, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition: with twenty-four plates engraved by Proud.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Haunch of Venison, a poetical epistle to Lord
Clare. By the late Dr. Goldsmith. With a Head of the Author, Drawn by
Henry Bunbury, Esq; and Etched by Bretherton. London: Printed for J.
Ridley, . . . and G. Kearsly, . . . MDCCLXXVI. _4to, green levant
morocco, gilt and mosaic back, side panels in ribbon and foliage designs
of blue, brown, citron, and ivory mosaic, doubled with green morocco,
gilt and mosaic borders, vellum guards, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition: with half-title and etched portrait.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--Poems and Plays, by Oliver Goldsmith, M. B. To which
is prefixed, the Life of the Author. Printed for W^{m}. Wilson
Bookseller & Stationer at Homer's head N^{o}. 6 Dame Street the Corner
of Palace Street, Dublin. M,DCC,LXXVII. _Small 8vo, red levant morocco,
gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First collected edition. Thomas Jolley's copy, with his book-plate, and
a manuscript note, "given me by Edm^{d}. Malone Esq: Thos.
Jolley--1811." All the text of imprint on the title-page, except the
date, is in an oval vignette. Preceding the Life by W. Glover is a
medallion portrait of Goldsmith by Esdall. A plate illustrating "She
Stoops to Conquer" has been inserted.

The date on the half-title of "The Deserted Village" should be 1770
instead of 1769, and that of "She Stoops to Conquer," 1773 instead of
1772.

Collation: Title with vignette, one leaf (verso blank). Contents, one
leaf (verso blank). Life by Glover, B1-B5. W. Woty's Epitaph on the
death of Goldsmith, B6 (verso blank). Pages i.-xi. Half-title, "Poems,
by Dr. Goldsmith," B7 (verso blank). Four poems, B8-C4 (verso blank).
Half-title, "The Hermit, a ballad. first printed in M DCC LXV," C5
(verso blank). Letter respecting "The Hermit," C6. "The Hermit," and two
other poems, C7-D3. Half-title, "The Traveller; or, a Prospect of
Society. a poem. first printed in M, DCC,LXV," D4 (verso blank). "To the
Rev. Henry Goldsmith," D5-D6 (verso blank). "The Traveller," D7-E6
(verso blank). Half-title, "The Deserted Village, a poem. first printed
in M, DCC,LXIX," E7 (verso blank). "To Sir Joshua Reynolds," E8. "The
Deserted Village," F1-F7. Three other poems, F8-G1. Half-title, "The
Haunch of Venison, a poetic epistle, to Lord Clare. first printed in
MDCCLXXV.," G2 (verso blank). Text, G3-G5 recto, Songs, etc, five poems,
G5 verso-G7 (verso blank). Half-title, "Retaliation: a poem. first
printed in M, DCC, LXXIV. after the author's death," G8 (verso Note).
Poem, H1-H5 (verso blank). Half-title, "Plays, by Dr. Goldsmith," H6
(verso blank). Second half-title, "The Good-natur'd man: a comedy. as
performed at the Theatre-Royal in Covent-Garden. first printed in M,
DCC, LXVIII," H7 (verso blank). Preface, H8. Prologue by Dr. Johnson, I,
1, ending with "Dramatis Personae." Text, I, 2-P5 (verso blank).
Half-title, "She Stoops to Conquer: or, the Mistakes of a Night. a
comedy. as it is acted at the Theatre-Royal, Covent-Garden. first
printed in M, DCC, LXXII," P6 (verso blank). Dedication to Dr. Johnson,
P7 recto. Prologue by Garrick, P7 verso-P8 (verso "Dramatis Personae").
Text, Q1-Z2, ending with the second Epilogue by J. Craddock. Pages
1-328.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--Poems and Plays. By Oliver Goldsmith, M. B. to which
is Prefixed The Life of the Author. London. Printed for B. Newbery and
T. Johnson, . . . MDCCLXXX. _12mo, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by F.
Bedford._

Portrait, engraved title, and three other plates.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Poetical and Dramatic Works of Oliver Goldsmith,
M. B. now first collected. With an account of the life and writings of
the author. London: printed by H. Goldney . . . MDCCLXXX. _8vo, two
volumes, citron levant morocco, gilt back, sides richly tooled, double
panel, floral design, gilt over uncut edges, by Meunier._

Portrait by Cook.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Poetical and Dramatic Works of Oliver Goldsmith,
M.B. A new edition. With an account of the life and writings of the
author. In two volumes. London: printed by H. Goldney, for Messieurs
Rivington, T. Carnan, E. Newbery, and W. Nicoll, &c . . . M DCC LXXXVI.
_Small 8vo, two volumes, Spanish calf, gilt back._

Portrait by Cook. The dedication to Sir Joshua Reynolds is signed by T.
Evans and dated Strand, January 1, 1780.


GOLDSMITH AND PARNELL.--Poems by Goldsmith and Parnell. [vignette]
London: printed by W. Bulmer and Co. Shakespeare Printing Office, . . .
1795. _4to, original boards, uncut edges._

First edition, printed upon Whatman paper. Eight woodcut vignettes and
five full-page illustrations by Thomas and John Bewick, after R. and J.
Johnson.

The text consists of The Deserted Village, The Traveller, the Hermit,
and the Lives of Goldsmith and Parnell by Isaac Reed and Goldsmith,
respectively.


GOLDSMITH AND PARNELL.--Poems by Goldsmith and Parnell. 1795. _4to,
green morocco, gilt back and sides, silk linings, gilt edges, by
Staggemeier._

One of three copies printed on vellum, with one of the five full-page
cuts in duplicate.


GOLDSMITH AND PARNELL.--Poems by Goldsmith and Parnell. London: printed
for T. Cadell and W. Davies . . . 1804. _Royal 8vo, boards, uncut
edges._

Printed on Whatman paper, with woodcut illustrations by the Bewicks.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Poems of Oliver Goldsmith. A new edition.
Adorned with plates. London: Printed by T. Bensley, . . . for F. J. Du
Roveray, . . . 1800. _8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back, side
panels, centre ornaments, doubled with red morocco, gilt borders in the
manner of Derome, gilt over uncut edges, by Bedford._

Largest paper copy. Frontispiece-portrait by Anker Smith after E. F.
Burney, and six plates by T. Medland, Neagle, J. Heath, and A. Smith
after Wheatley and Hamilton, all with proofs added. Besides these, one
hundred extra illustrations have been inserted, including seventeen
portraits of Goldsmith, the Bewick and Westall series of illustrations,
and two original drawings, one in sepia of Dr. Dodd and one in
water-colours of the Covent Garden Theatre. Most of the plates are in
proof state, and at page 112 is a brilliant impression of the mezzotint
of General Wolfe by Spooner after Smith.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Poetical Works of Oliver Goldsmith, M.B. with
the Life of the Author. Embellished with wood cuts by T. Bewick.
Glocester printed and sold by D. Walker . . . 1809. _Foolscap 8vo,
boards, uncut edges._


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Poetical Works of Oliver Goldsmith. With
Remarks, attempting to ascertain, chiefly from local observation, the
Actual Scene of the Deserted Village; and illustrative engravings, by
Mr. Alkin, from drawings taken upon the spot. By Rev. R. H. Newell, B.
D. Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. London: printed by Ellerton
and Henderson, . . . for Suttaby, Evance, and company, . . . 1811. _4to,
olive levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Six tinted plates, and an engraved leaf of dedication to William Payne,
with a vignette at the foot.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Miscellaneous Works of Oliver Goldsmith, with an
account of his Life and Writings . . . Edited by Washington Irving,
Esq. Paris: published by A. and W. Galignani . . . [Printed by Jules
Didot] 1825. _Royal 8vo, four volumes, blue morocco, gilt back and
sides, with the arms of Charles X on the sides, gilt edges, by Purgold._

Large paper copy, with finished and unfinished proofs on India paper of
the portraits of Goldsmith and Irving, engraved by Wedgwood from
originals by Reynolds and Sieurac.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Miscellaneous Works of Oliver Goldsmith, M. B.
including a variety of pieces now first collected. By James Prior, . . .
London: John Murray, . . . M DCCC XXX VII. _8vo, four volumes, boards,
uncut edges._

Four engraved frontispiece-titles by E. Finden after T. Creswick.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Poetical Works of Oliver Goldsmith London
William Pickering 1839. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Memoir by the Rev. John Mitford, and a portrait of Goldsmith.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Poetical Works of Oliver Goldsmith, . . .
Illustrated by wood engravings from the designs of . . . Members of the
Etching Club. With a Biographical Memoir and Notes on the Poems. Edited
by Bolton Corney . . . London: Longman . . . 1846. _4to, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Thirty-eight woodcut illustrations by Creswick, Redgrave, Cope, and
others.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Poetical Works of Oliver Goldsmith With Thirty
Illustrations by John Absolon, Birket Foster, James Godwin, and Harrison
Weir. London Cundall & Addey, . . . 1851. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Works of Oliver Goldsmith.   Edited by Peter
Cunningham . . . London: John Murray . . . 1854. _8vo, four volumes,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Matthews._

Illustrated by the insertion of one hundred and thirteen plates,
including fifty-two portraits, the remainder illustrating "The Vicar of
Wakefield" and other works; engraved by Stothard, Burney, Westall,
Johannot, etc. Most of the plates are proofs, and some are in two and
three states.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--The Poems and Plays of Oliver Goldsmith. Edited by
Austin Dobson with [6] etchings by John Jellicoe & Herbert Railton.
London J. M. Dent and Co . . . 1889. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

One of two hundred and fifty large paper copies printed.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--A Pretty Book of Pictures for Little Masters and
Misses, or, Tommy Trip's History of Beasts and Birds. With a familiar
description of each in verse and prose. To which is prefix'd the History
of little Tom Trip himself, of his Dog Jouler, and of Woglog the great
Giant. Written by Oliver Goldsmith . . . embellished with charming
engravings on wood from the original blocks engraved by Thomas Bewick . . .
London: printed for, and Published by, Edwin Pearson . . .
MDCCCLXVII. _4to, red straight-grain morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Bedford._

Two hundred and fifty copies printed, with seventy-seven woodcuts on
India paper.


GOLDSMITH, OLIVER.--See Dobson, Austin. Forster, John. Goody Twoshoes.
Percy, Bishop. Scarron, Paul.


GOLDZIHER, IGNAZ.--Mythology among the Hebrews and its historical
development by Ignaz Goldziher . . . Translated from the German, with
additions by the author   by Russell Martineau, . . . London Longmans,
Green, and Co. 1877 . . . _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


GOMEZ, MADELEINE ANGELIQUE POISSON DE.--La Belle Assemblee: being a
curious Collection of some very Remarkable Incidents which happen'd to
Persons of the First Quality in France. Interspers'd with Entertaining
and Improving Observations made by them on several Passages in History,
both Ancient and Modern. Written in French for the Entertainment of the
King, and dedicated to him by Madam de Gomez. Adorn'd with
Copper-Plates. . . . The Eighth edition. London: Printed for H. Woodfall
. . . MDCCLXV. _12mo, four volumes in two, sprinkled calf, citron
edges._

Twenty plates by Basire.


GOODY TWOSHOES.--The History of little Goody Twoshoes; otherwise called
Mrs. Margery Twoshoes. with The Means by which she acquired her
Learning and Wisdom, and in Consequence thereof her Estate. Set
forth at large for the Benefit of those,

/p
    Who from a State of Rags and Care,
    Who having Shoes but half a Pair,
    Their Fortune and their Fame would fix,
    And gallop in their Coach and Six.
p/

See the original Manuscript in the Vatican at Rome, and the Cuts by
Michael Angelo; illustrated with the Comments of our great modern
Criticks. The First Worcester edition. Printed at Worcester,
Massachusetts. By Isaiah Thomas, And sold, Wholesale and Retail,
at his Book Store. M DCC LXXXVII. _16mo, calf, gilt back and sides, gilt
top, uncut edges._

Woodcut frontispiece and thirty-four illustrations in the text.

Sometimes attributed to Oliver Goldsmith.


GORDON, JOHN BROWN.--Reminiscences of the Civil War by General John B.
Gordon of the Confederate Army with [3] portraits. New York   Charles
Scribner's Sons 1903. _8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


GORING, CHARLES.--Irene; or, the Fair Greek, a tragedy: As it is Acted
at the Theatre Royal in Drury-lane, By Her Majesty's Sworn Servants.
London: Printed for John Bayley at the Judge's Head in Chancery-Lane,
near Fleetstreet. 1708. _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by David._

First edition. A1-A4, a1-a4, and B1-I2 in fours, half-title on A1, title
on A2. Dedicated to Henry, Duke of Beaufort.


GORRINGE, HENRY H.--Egyptian Obelisks by Henry H. Gorringe . . .
Fifty-one full-page illustrations thirty-two artotypes, eighteen
engravings, and one chromolithograph   Published by the Author . . . New
York [1882] _4to, cloth, uncut edges._


GORTON, JOHN.--A general Biographical Dictionary. By John Gorton, . . .
A new edition, to which is added a supplementary volume completing the
work to the present time. . . . London: Henry G. Bohn, . . . 1851. _8vo,
four volumes, half blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


GOSPEL.--The Gospel according to Matthew, Mark, and Luke   London Kegan
Paul, Trench & Co., . . . MDCCCLXXXV. _Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut
edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed.


GOSSE, EDMUND.--From Shakespeare to Pope an inquiry into the causes and
phenomena of the rise of classical poetry in England. By Edmund Gosse.
New York Dodd, Mead & Company   1885. _Small 8vo, half brown morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Stikeman._

Original manuscript of the Preface inserted.


GOSSE, EDMUND.--Firdausi in Exile and other poems by Edmund Gosse
London Kegan Paul, Trench, & Co., MDCCCLXXXV. _Crown 8vo, original
covers, uncut edges_.

One of fifty large paper copies printed, with a frontispiece.


GOSSE, EDMUND.--Life of William Congreve by Edmund Gosse, . . . London
Walter Scott, . . . 1888. _Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


GOSSE, EDMUND.--See English Odes.


GOURGAUD, GASPARD.--Napoleon and the Grand Army in Russia, or a critical
examination of the Work of Count Ph. de Segur, by General Gourgaud, late
principal orderly officer and aid-de-camp to the Emperor Napoleon. . . .
London: Martin Bossange and Co., . . . 1825. _8vo, blue morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges._


GOZZI, COUNT CARLO.--The Memoirs of Count Carlo Gozzi translated into
English by John Addington Symonds With Essays on Italian Impromptu
Comedy, Gozzi's Life, The Dramatic Fables, and Pietro Longhi By the
Translator with portrait and six original etchings By Adolphe Lalauze
also eleven subjects illustrating Italian Comedy by Maurice Sand
engraved on copper by A. Manceau, and coloured by hand . . . London.
John C. Nimmo . . . MDCCCXC. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, original cloth,
uncut edges._

No. 71 of two hundred and ten large paper copies printed, with the seven
etchings in duplicate.


GRAHAM AND ASHBEE.--Travels in Tunisia With a Glossary, a Map, a
Bibliography, and Fifty Illustrations. By Alexander Graham, . . . and H.
S. Ashbee, . . . London: Dulau & Co., . . . 1887. . . . _Royal 8vo,
cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Presentation copy from Mr. Ashbee.


GRAHAM, MARIA.--Memoirs of the Life of Nicholas Poussin. By Maria Graham
. . . London: printed for Longman, . . . 1820. _8vo, half blue morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait of Poussin and folded plate of his house.


GRAHAME, JAMES.--The History of the United States of North America, from
the Plantation of the British Colonies till their Revolt and Declaration
of Independence. By James Grahame, Esq. London: Smith, Elder and Co. . . .
1836. _8vo, four volumes, half green levant morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges._


GRAMMONT, COUNT.--See Hamilton, Count Anthony.


GRANGER, JAMES.--A Biographical History of England, From Egbert the
Great to the Revolution: consisting of characters disposed in different
classes, and adapted to a methodical catalogue of engraved British
heads; intended as an essay towards reducing our biography to system,
and a help to the knowledge of portraits; interspersed with a variety of
anecdotes, and memoirs of a great number of persons, not to be found in
any other biographical work. With a Preface, shewing the utility of a
collection of engraved portraits to supply the defect, and answer the
various purposes, of medals. By the Rev. J. Granger, . . . Fifth
edition, with upwards of four hundred additional lives. . . . London:
printed for William Baynes and Son, . . . 1824. _Royal 8vo, six volumes,
half russia, uncut edges._

Two hundred and ninety-four portraits of the Richardson series inserted,
and twenty-nine from other sources.


GRANT, FRANCIS.--Life of Samuel Johnson by Lieut.-Col. F. Grant. London
Walter Scott . . . 1887. _Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


GRANT, ULYSSES SIMPSON.--Personal Memoirs of U. S. Grant. . . . [with
maps and illustrations] New York: Charles L. Webster & Company. 1885.
_8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


GRAY, GEORGE J.--The Earlier Cambridge Stationers & Bookbinders and The
First Cambridge Printer by George J. Gray   Printed for the
Bibliographical Society at the Ox. ford University Press October 1904.
_4to, original paper wrappers, uncut edges._

No. XIII. of Illustrated Monographs issued by the Bibliographical
Society. Twenty-nine plates.


GRAY, THOMAS.--An Elegy wrote in a Country Church Yard. London: Printed
for R. Dodsley . . . And sold by M. Cooper . . . 1751. _4to, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First edition, with bands containing emblems of Death at head and foot
of title, repeated at the head of the fifth page.


GRAY, THOMAS.--An Elegy written in a Country Church yard. A new edition.
London: Printed for J. Dodsley, . . . M DCC LXXI. [Price Six Pence.]
_8vo, red levant morocco, gilt fillets, uncut edges._

Engraved frontispiece and two vignettes.


GRAY, THOMAS.--Elegy written in a Country Church-yard. [vignette]
London: John van Vorst, [printed by Samuel Bentley] MDCCCXXXVI. _4to,
original blue cloth, gilt edges._

Dedication to Samuel Rogers, and Preface by John Martin dated London,
October 10, 1834.

Vignette on the title-page by Powis after Constable, and thirty-two
other illustrations after Constable, Stothard, Cattermole, Charles and
Thomas Landseer, Westall, Callcott, Mulready, Copley and Thales
Fielding, and others.


GRAY, THOMAS.--Odes by Mr. Gray. [Greek: PhONANTA] [Greek: SPsNETOISI]
. . . Pindar, Olymp. II. [vignette of Strawberry Hill] Printed at
Strawberry-Hill, For R. and J. Dodsley in Pall-Mall. M DCC LVII. _4to,
red levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition, and the first work issued by the Strawberry Hill Press.

Half-title, A1, title, A2, and B-E3 in twos.


GRAY, THOMAS.--Poems by Mr. Gray. London: Printed for J. Dodsley, . . .
MDCCLXVIII. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, side corners, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Joly._

First collected edition.


GRAY, THOMAS.--The Poems of Mr. Gray. With Notes by Gilbert Wakefield . . .
London: printed for G. Kearsley . . . 1786. _8vo, half green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Two portraits and twelve other plates inserted, one in two states.


GRAY, THOMAS.--Poems by Mr. Gray. Parma printed by Bodoni M DCCXC III.
_Royal 8vo, boards, uncut edges._

One of two hundred copies printed.

Portrait of Gray sitting, by J. Hopwood after Richardson.


GRAY, THOMAS.--Poems. 1793. _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back, side
panels, corner ornaments, gilt top, uncut edges, by Ramage._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed, with four inserted plates.


GRAY, THOMAS.--The Poetical Works of Thomas Gray . . . with some account
of his life and writings. The whole carefully revised; and illustrated
by notes. To which are annexed, Poems addressed to, and in memory of, Mr
Gray; several of which were never before collected. Second edition,
considerably enlarged and improved. London: printed by C. Whittingham . . .
1800. _Foolscap 8vo, red morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt
edges, by Bozerian the younger._

Portrait of Gray and six plates, after the designs of Burney, including
the caricature of "Tophet" [Mr. Tyson].


GRAY, THOMAS.--The Poems of Gray. A new edition. Adorned with plates.
London: Printed by T. Bensley, . . . for F. J. Du Roveray, . . . 1800.
_Crown 8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Besides the frontispiece-portrait by A. Smith after Burney, and six
plates by Neagle, Heath, and Holloway after Hamilton and Fuseli, eleven
plates, some proofs on India paper, have been inserted, including four
portraits of Gray and engravings after the Westall designs.


GRAY, THOMAS.--Poems. 1800. _8vo, citron straight-grain morocco, gilt
back, blind-tooled and brown mosaic borders on the sides, gilt edges._

Large paper copy. Portrait and six plates.


GRAY, THOMAS.--Poems. 1800. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, side
panels, doubled with red morocco, gilt border in the manner of Derome,
gilt over uncut edges, by Bedford._

Another copy, printed upon largest paper, and extra-illustrated by the
insertion of one hundred and twelve proof portraits and views, many
proofs in different states and a fragment of manuscript. The portraits
include eleven of Gray, one engraved by Caroline Watson.


GRAY, THOMAS.--Poems. 1800. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, side
panels, doubled with red morocco, borders in the manner of Derome, gilt
over uncut edges, by Matthews._

Another copy, printed upon largest paper, and extra-illustrated by the
insertion of over seventy plates, including numerous portraits of Gray,
duplicates in the earliest state of the illustrations published with the
book, and many other plates, proofs on India paper and before letters.


GRAY, THOMAS.--The Works of Thomas Gray, containing his Poems and
Correspondence, with Memoirs of his Life and Writings. A New Edition,
containing some Additions, not before printed, with Notes of the various
editors. London: printed for Harding, Triphook, and Lepard . . .
M.DCCCXXV. _8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, wide side
borders, gilt over uncut edges, by Holloway._

Large paper copy, with fifty-five extra plates inserted, for the most
part in proof state, including all the known portraits of Gray. Some of
the plates are in three states.


GRAY, THOMAS.--The Poetical Works of Thomas Gray. London: printed for
John Sharpe, . . . by C. and C. Whittingham, Chiswick. M DCCC XXVI.
_Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Engraved frontispiece-title and five other plates by W. Finden after
Richard Westall.


GRAY, THOMAS.--The Works of Thomas Gray London William Pickering   1836
[-1843]   _Post 8vo, five volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
over uncut edges, by Bedford._

Thick paper copy. Portrait engraved by Adcock, and Memoir by the Rev.
John Mitford.


GRAY, THOMAS.--The Works of Thomas Gray. 1836-43. _Post 8vo, five
volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Large and thick paper copy, only twenty printed.


GRAY, THOMAS.--The Poetical Works of Thomas Gray   London William
Pickering   1836. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait and Memoir by the Rev. J. Mitford.


GRAY, THOMAS.--Gray's Poetical Works, English and Latin, Illustrated;
and edited with introductory stanzas by the Rev. John Moultrie . . .
Eton, E. P. Williams . . . M.DCCCXLV. _8vo, green morocco, gilt back and
side panels, gilt edges, by Hayday._

Portrait and seven steel engravings by Radclyffe, also four woodcuts by
Sly.


GRAY, THOMAS.--Five original water-colour drawings illustrating Gray's
poems, by Richard Westall, accompanied by the engravings from them by W.
Radclyffe, J. H. Robinson, George Corbould, R. Rhodes, and W. Finden;
also a portrait of Gray, proof on India paper, by Anker Smith after
Burney. _4to, green levant morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt edges,
by W. Matthews._


GREAT-BRITAIN AND AMERICA.--The Case of Great-Britain and America,
addressed to the King and both Houses of Parliament . . . London:
Printed, Philadelphia, Re-Printed by William and Thomas Bradford, . . .
MDCCLXIX. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, side panel, uncut edges,
by Zaehnsdorf._


GREATHEED, BERTIE.--The Regent: a tragedy. As it is acted at the Theatre
Royal in Drury-Lane. London: printed for J. Robson and W. Clarke, . . .
M. DCC. LXXXVIII. _8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Dedication to Mrs. Siddons, Epilogue by Mrs. Piozzi.


GREELEY, HORACE.--The American Conflict: a History of the Great
Rebellion in the United States of America, 1860-'64: its causes,
incidents, and results: intended to exhibit especially its moral and
political phases, with the drift and progress of American opinion
respecting Human Slavery, From 1776 to the Close of the War for the
Union. By Horace Greeley. Illustrated by portraits on steel of generals,
statesmen, and other eminent men: [two frontispieces] views of places of
historic interest. maps, diagrams of battle-fields, naval actions, etc.:
from official sources. . . . Hartford: published by O. D. Case &
Company. . . . 1865. [-1867] _Royal 8vo, two volumes, half brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Twelve steel plates containing one hundred and forty-three portraits,
and seventy-nine other illustrations.


GREELEY, HORACE.--Recollections of a Busy Life by Horace Greeley   New
York   J. B. Ford and Company . . . 1868. _8vo, half green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._


GREEN, HENRY.--Shakespeare and the Emblem Writers; an exposition of
their similarities of thought and expression. Preceded by a view of
emblem-literature down to A. D. 1616. By Henry Green, M. A. With
numerous Illustrative Devices from the Original Authors. [vignette]
London: Truebner & Co., . . . 1870. . . . _Royal 8vo, decorated cloth,
uncut edges._

Large paper copy, with seventeen plates and numerous illustrations in
the text.


GREEN, HENRY.--Andrea Alciati and his Books of Emblems a biographical
and bibliographical study by Henry Green, M. A. London Truebner & Co. M.
DCCC. LXXII. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Only two hundred and fifty copies printed. Title in a woodcut border,
portrait, and eighteen other illustrations.


GREEN, JOHN RICHARD.--History of the English People. By John Richard
Green, . . . London: Macmillan and Co. 1877. [1878, 1879, 1880] _8vo,
four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition: with fifteen maps.


GREEN, MATTHEW.--The Spleen. An Epistle Inscribed to his particular
Friend Mr. C. J. . . . By the late Mr. Matthew Green, of the
Custom-house, London. London; Printed: And sold by A. Dodd, . . .
and at all the Pamphlet-Shops in Town. M. DCC. XXX VII. . . . _Small
8vo, paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._


GREENAWAY, KATE.--Marigold Garden Pictures and Rhymes By Kate Greenaway
printed in colours by Edmund Evans London George Routledge and Sons . . .
n.d. _4to, half cloth, citron edges._


GREG, WALTER WILSON.--A List of English Plays written before 1643 and
printed before 1700. By Walter Wilson Greg. London: printed for the
Bibliographical Society, by Blades, East & Blades. March, 1900, for
1899. _4to, original paper covers, uncut edges._


GREG, WALTER WILSON.--A List of Masques, Pageants, &c. supplementary to
A List of English Plays, By Walter Wilson Greg. London: printed for the
Bibliographical Society, By Blades, East & Blades. February, 1902, for
1901. _4to, original paper wrappers, uncut edges._


GREGORY, J. W.--See Hutchinson, Gregory, and Lydekker.


GRENVILLE, GEORGE.--See Nugent, Lord.


GRENVILLE, THOMAS.--See Payne and Foss.


GRESSET, JEAN BAPTISTE LOUIS DE.--See Snow, Robert.


GREVILLE, CHARLES CAVENDISH FULKE.--The Greville Memoirs. A Journal of
the Reigns of King George IV. and King William IV. By the late Charles
C. F. Greville, . . . Edited by Henry Reeve . . . London: Longmans,
Green & Co., . . . 1874. _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


GREVILLE, CHARLES CAVENDISH FULKE.--The Greville Memoirs (Second part) A
Journal of the Reign of Queen Victoria from 1837 to 1852. By Charles C.
F. Greville . . . London: Longmans, Green, and Co., . . . 1885. _8vo,
three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


GREVILLE, CHARLES CAVENDISH FULKE.--The Greville Memoirs (Third part.) A
Journal of the Reign of Queen Victoria from 1852 to 1860. By the late
Charles C. F. Greville, . . . London: Longmans, Green, and Co. 1887.
_8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


GREY, DOUGLAS.--See Wilson and Grey.


GREY, LADY JANE.--See Nicolas, Sir Nicholas Harris.


GRIFFITH, ELIZABETH.--The School for Rakes: a comedy. As it is Performed
at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. London. Printed for T. Becket and P.
A. De Hondt, . . . M DCC LXIX. . . . _8vo, morocco, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


GRIFFITHS, A. F., _editor_.--Bibliotheca Anglo-Poetica: or a Descriptive
Catalogue of a rare and rich collection of Early English Poetry: in the
possession of Longman & Co. Illustrated by occasional extracts and
remarks, critical and biographical. London: printed by Thomas Davison,
for the Proprietors of the Collection. 1815. _Imperial 8vo, blue levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

One of fifty copies printed on large paper, with coloured frontispiece
and woodcuts.

The collection here described was commenced by T. Park and completed by
Thomas Hill.


GRIMM, HERMAN.--Life of Michael Angelo, by Herman Grimm. Translated with
the author's sanction by Fanny Elizabeth Bunnett . . . Boston: Little,
Brown, and Company 1866. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, green levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by R. W. Smith._

No. 3 of fifty large paper copies printed. Illustrated by the insertion
of one hundred and twenty portraits and views, and an original drawing
of St. Mark's, Venice. Thirty of the plates are proofs on India paper,
and others are proofs before letters.


GRIMSTON, WILLIAM LUCKYN, (FIRST) VISCOUNT.--The Lawyer's Fortune: or,
Love in a Hollow Tree. A comedy. London: Printed and Sold by E. Hill, . . .
M, DCC, XXXVI. _Small 8vo, brown morocco, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

This play, first printed in quarto, 1705, was written when the author
was only thirteen years of age. He tried to buy up the edition, but was
only partially successful. In 1710, when he was Parliamentary candidate
for St. Alban's, Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough caused this edition to be
printed at her own expense, with a woodcut (page 9) representing the
author as an elephant walking a tight-rope. This edition also he bought
up as far as possible.

Engraved frontispiece of a hollow tree.

Title, A1 (verso blank). "To the Right Sensible, the Lord Flame" [Samuel
Johnson], signed "The Publisher," A2. "The Preface," A3-A4 (verso
"Dramatis Personae"). Text, B1-K3 in fours.


GROSE, FRANCIS.--See Bunbury, H.


GROTE, GEORGE.--Plato, and the other companions of Sokrates. By George
Grote, . . . London: John Murray, . . . 1865. . . . _8vo, three volumes,
half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First edition.


GROTE, HARRIET LEWIN.--Memoir of the Life of Ary Scheffer. By Mrs.
Grote. London: John Murray, . . . 1860. _8vo, original cloth, uncut
edges_.

First edition. Portrait and facsimile.


GROWOLL, ADOLF.--American Book Clubs their beginnings and history, and a
bibliography of their publications by A. Growoll New York Dodd, Mead and
Company 1897. _12mo, half olive calf, uncut edges._

No. 64 of three hundred copies printed on hand-made paper.


GUARAS, ANTONIO DE.--The Accession of Queen Mary: being the contemporary
narrative of Antonio de Guaras, a Spanish merchant resident in London.
Edited with an introduction, translation, notes, and an appendix of
documents, including a contemporary Ballad in facsimile, by Richard
Garnett . . . London: Lawrence and Bullen . . . 1892. _Square 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

Three hundred and fifty copies printed.


GUARDIAN, THE.--See British Classics and British Essayists.


GUEULETTE, THOMAS SIMON.--The Thousand and One Quarters of an Hour
(Tartarian Tales) edited by Leonard C. Smithers London H. S. Nichols and
Co. . . . M DCCC XCIII. _Royal 8vo, flexible vellum boards, gilt top,
uncut edges._

One of seventy-five copies printed on hand-made paper.


GUICCIOLI, COUNTESS TERESA.--. . . My Recollections of Lord Byron; and
those of eye-witnesses of his life. "The long promised work of the
Countess Guiccioli . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1869. _8vo, two
volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._


GUIZOT, FRANCOIS PIERRE GUILLAUME.--The Fine Arts their nature and
relations By M. Guizot. Translated with the assistance of the author By
George Grove. With illustrations drawn on wood by George Scharf, Jun.
London: Thomas Bosworth. 1853. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


GUTCH, JOHN, _editor_.--Collectanea Curiosa; or Miscellaneous Tracts,
relating to the History and Antiquities of England and Ireland, the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and a variety of other Subjects.
Chiefly collected, and now first published, from the Manuscripts of
Archbishop Sancroft . . . Oxford, at the Clarendon Press . . .
MDCCLXXXI. _8vo, two volumes, Cambridge panelled calf, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Bedford._


GUTCH, JOHN MATHEW, _editor_.--A lytell Geste of Robin Hode with other
ancient & modern ballads and songs relating to this celebrated yeoman to
which is prefixed his history and character, grounded upon other
documents made use of by his former biographer, "Mister Ritson." Edited
by John Mathew Gutch, . . . and adorned with cuts by F. W. Fairholt, . . .
[vignette] London: Longman, Brown, Green, & Longmans. M. DCCC. XLVII.
_Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Ritson, another plate, and numerous woodcuts in the text.


[GUTENBERG, JOHN.]--John Gutenberg, First Master Printer, His Acts,
and most remarkable Discourses, and his Death. From the German, By
C. W. London: Truebner and Co. . . . 1860. _4to, half brown morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges._

One hundred copies printed.