Produced by Curtis Weyant, Christine D. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Posner Memorial Collection
(http://posner.library.cmu.edu/Posner/))






   Transcriber's Note

   Led by the belief that the spelling and punctuation of each
   entry is based directly on the original title pages no
   intentional 'corrections' have been made to the content. The
   text in this e-book is as close to the original printed text
   as pgdp proofing and postprocessing could get it. In some
   entries larger spaces are used as spacers between
   bibliographic fields instead of punctuation. These have been
   retained to the best of our ability and are represented as
   non-breaking spaces.


  A CATALOGUE OF
  Books in English
  later than 1700, forming
  a portion of the Library
  of Robert Hoe New
  York 1905


  EX
  LIBRIS
  ROBERT
  HOE

VOLUME III


CATALOGUE

VOLUME III


  ONE HUNDRED COPIES ONLY, INCLUDING
  THREE UPON IMPERIAL
  JAPANESE VELLUM . PRINTED BY
  THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, CAMBRIDGE


  A Catalogue of Books
  in English
  Later than 1700

  Forming a Portion of the Library
  of Robert Hoe

[Illustration]

VOLUME III

  Privately Printed
  New York . 1905


  THIS CATALOGUE WAS COMPILED BY
  CAROLYN SHIPMAN




THE CATALOGUE


QUARITCH, BERNARD.--Palaeography Notes upon the History of Writing and
the Medieval Art of Illumination by Bernard Quaritch Extended from a
Lecture, delivered at a Conversazione of the Sette of Odd Volumes, at
the Galleries of the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours, 12th
December, 1893 London privately printed   1894. _Royal 8vo, half red
morocco, gilt back, gilt top._

No. 67 of one hundred and ninety-nine copies printed. Presentation copy
from the author.


QUATREMERE DE QUINCY, ANTOINE CHRYSOSTOME.--An Essay on the Nature, the
End, and the Means of Imitation in the Fine Arts. Translated from the
French of M. Quatremere de Quincy. By J. C. Kent. London: Smith, Elder
and Co., . . . 1837. _8vo, half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


QUATREMERE DE QUINCY, ANTOINE CHRYSOSTOME.--See Duppa and Quatremere de
Quincy.


QUEVEDO, FRANCISCO de.--The Works of Don Francisco de Quevedo.
Translated from the Spanish. . . . Illustrated with Beautiful
Engravings. Edinburgh: printed for Mundell & Son; . . . 1798. _Crown
8vo, three volumes, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Three frontispieces, by R. Scott after A. Carse.


QUILLET, CLAUDIUS.--Callipaedia: A Poem: In four books. With some other
Pieces. Written in Latin by Claudius Quillet, made English by N. Rowe,
Esq; To which is Prefix'd Mr. Bayle's Account of His Life. London,
printed for E. Sanger . . . and E. Curll . . . M. DCC. XII. _Royal 8vo,
calf, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Frontispiece engraved by M. Van der Gucht. Possibly a large paper copy.

The translators were Rowe, Cobb, Sewell, and Diaper.


QUILLET, CLAUDIUS.--Callipaedia: or, the Art Of Getting Beautiful
Children. A Poem In Four Books. Written in Latin   By Claudius Quillet;
Made English By N. Rowe, Esq; &c. The Third Edition . . . London,
Printed, and sold by W. Feales, . . . MDCCXXXIII. _12mo, calf gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Four plates by Van der Gucht.


QUILLINAN, EDWARD.--Woodcuts and Verses. [cut] Kent: Printed at the
private Press of Lee Priory; by John Warwick. 1820. _4to, green morocco,
gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

One hundred copies printed with the object of exhibiting all the wood
engravings and specimens of every type used at the Lee Priory Press. The
body of the book is printed on India paper, to give the woodcuts their
full value.


QUILTER, HARRY.--Giotto by Harry Quilter London   Sampson Low, . . .
1880. _4to, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Coloured frontispiece and twelve other plates.


QUIN, JAMES.--Quin's Jests; or, the Facetious Man's Pocket-Companion.
Containing every Species of Wit, Humour, and Repartee, with A Compleat
Collection of Epigrams, Bon-Mots, &c &c. London: Printed for S. Bladon,
. . . M DCCLXVI. _12mo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._


QUIN, JAMES.--The Life of Mr. James Quin, comedian. With the History of
the Stage from His commencing Actor to his Retreat to Bath. Illustrated
With many curious and interesting Anecdotes of several Persons of
Distinction, Literature, and Gallantry. To which is added, A genuine and
authentic Copy of his Last Will and Testament. Dedicated to David
Garrick, Esq; London: Printed for S. Bladon, . . . MDCCLXVI. _12mo,
calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Portrait of Quin, an oval, engraved on copper.


RADCLIFFE, ANN WARD.--The Italian; or, The Confessional of the Black
Penitents. A romance. By Ann Radcliffe, . . . [vignette] Chiswick:
printed by C. and C. Whittingham; . . . 1826. _16mo, two volumes, half
green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


RAIMBACH, MICHAEL THOMSON SCOTT, _editor_.--Memoirs and Recollections of
the late Abraham Raimbach, Esq. Engraver, . . . including a Memoir of
Sir David Wilkie, R. A. edited by M. T. S. Raimbach, M. A . . . London:
Frederick Shoberl, Junior, . . . 1843. _Square 8vo, original cloth,
uncut edges._

Privately printed, with medallion portrait of Abraham Raimbach.


RAIMBACH, MICHAEL THOMSON SCOTT, _editor_.--Memoirs and Recollections of
the late Abraham Raimbach, Esq. Engraver . . . including a Memoir of Sir
David Wilkie, R. A. Edited by M. T. S. Raimbach, M. A. . . . London:
Frederick Shoberl, Junior . . . 1843. _Square 8vo, red levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

A few copies printed, not published. The present copy contains,
inserted, ninety-eight selected plates, for the most part proofs,
including fine examples of Raimbach's engraving and portraits of his
contemporaries.


RALPH, JAMES.--The Fall of the Earl of Essex. As it is Perform'd at the
Theatre in Goodman's-Fields. Alter'd from the Unhappy Favourite of Mr.
Banks. . . . London: Printed for W. Meadows, . . . and S. Billingsley,
. . . 1731. . . . _8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


RAMBLER, THE.--See British Classics and British Essayists.


RAMSAY, ALLAN.--Original Manuscripts of Poems, Verses, Letters, Poetical
Epistles, etc., by Allan Ramsay. _4to, light green levant morocco, gilt
back, side borders in the manner of Derome, doubled with maroon morocco,
covered with a scroll design, centre ornament of gilt and green and red
mosaic, maroon silk guards, borders, gilt edges, in a rose silk chemise
and maroon levant morocco case, by Zaehnsdorf._

This volume consists of a title in red and black on vellum, a leaf of
Contents, specifying fourteen poems, and twenty-eight leaves (forty-nine
full pages) of manuscript, dating from 1738 to 1746, in addition to a
mezzotint portrait of Ramsay by White, and a portrait of George
Whitefield, the subject of one of the poems.


RAMSAY, ALLAN.--The Gentle Shepherd, a Pastoral Comedy: with
Illustrations of the Scenary: an Appendix, containing Memoirs of David
Allan, the Scots Hogarth: besides original, and other Poems connected
with the Illustrations: and a comprehensive Glossary. To which are
prefixed an authentic Life of Allan Ramsay &c Edinburgh: printed by
Abernethy & Walker &c 1808. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Large paper copy. Portrait by Carse, map, and twelve plates of scenery.


RAMSAY, ALLAN.--The Tea-Table Miscellany. A Collection of Choice Songs
Scots & English. By Allan Ramsay . . . Glasgow   John Crum . . . 1871.
_Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


RANDOM RECOLLECTIONS of Courts and Society by a Cosmopolitan   London:
Ward and Downey . . . 1888. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


RAWLINSON, GEORGE.--The Five Great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern
World; or, the History, Geography, and Antiquities of Chaldaea, Assyria,
Babylon, Media and Persia, collected and illustrated from ancient and
modern sources. By George Rawlinson . . . London: John Murray . . . 1862
[-'64, '65, '67] _8vo, four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Four maps and six hundred and fifty-five woodcut
illustrations.


RAWLINSON, GEORGE.--The Sixth Great Oriental Monarchy; or the Geography,
History, & Antiquities of Parthia, collected and illustrated from
ancient and modern sources by George Rawlinson . . . London: Longmans,
Green, and Co. 1873. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition, with a coloured frontispiece, four maps and plans and
twenty-eight woodcut illustrations.


RAWLINSON, GEORGE.--The Seventh Great Oriental Monarchy or the
Geography, History, and Antiquities of the Sassanian or New Persian
Empire collected and illustrated from ancient and modern sources by
George Rawlinson . . . London   Longmans, Green, and Co. 1876. _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition, with seventy-six illustrations.


RAWLINSON, GEORGE.--See Herodotus.


RAWLINSON, SIR HENRY CRESWICKE.--See Herodotus.


RAYMOND, OLIVER.--The Art of Fishing on the principle of avoiding
cruelty. With approved rules for fishing used during sixty years'
practice, not hitherto published on any work on the subject. By the Rev.
Oliver Raymond, . . . London: Longmans, Green, and Co. 1866. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


READE, CHARLES.--Christie Johnstone. A novel. By Charles Reade, . . .
London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1853. . . . _Crown 8vo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


READE, CHARLES.--"It is never too late to mend." A matter of fact
romance. By Charles Reade, . . . Second edition. London: Richard Bentley
. . . 1856. . . . _12mo, three volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back,
side borders, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


READE, CHARLES.--The Course of true Love never did run smooth. By
Charles Reade, . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1857. . . . _Crown
8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition.


READE, CHARLES.--White Lies. A Story. By Charles Reade. . . . London:
Truebner & Co . . . 1857. . . . _12mo, three volumes, red levant morocco,
gilt back, side borders, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


READE, CHARLES.--Peg Woffington. A Novel. By Charles Reade.
[frontispiece] London: Richard Bentley . . . 1857. _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


READE, CHARLES.--Peg Woffington by Charles Reade. New York: Printed for
the Grolier Club MDCCCLXXXVII. _16mo, two volumes, green levant morocco,
gilt back and side panels, gilt top, uncut edges, by Joly._

Two hundred and fifty copies printed on Holland paper.


READE, CHARLES.--"Love me little, love me long." By Charles Reade, . . .
London: Truebner & Co., . . . 1859. . . . _Crown 8vo, two volumes, red
levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt over uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition.


READE, CHARLES.--Griffith Gaunt; or, Jealousy. By Charles Reade. . . .
London: Chapman and Hall, . . . 1866. . . . _Crown 8vo, three volumes,
red levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt over uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition.


READE, CHARLES.--A Simpleton A Story of the Day By Charles Reade . . .
London   Chapman and Hall, . . . 1873 . . . _Crown 8vo, three volumes,
red levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt over uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition.


READE, CHARLES.--A Woman-hater by Charles Reade, . . . William Blackwood
and Sons   Edinburgh and London   MDCCCLXXVII . . . _Crown 8vo, three
volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt over uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Originally published in _Blackwood's Magazine_.


READE, CHARLES.--The Cloister and the Hearth A Tale of the Middle Ages
by Charles Reade . . . New York   Dodd, Mead and Company   1892. _Crown
8vo, four volumes, embossed ooze calf, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed, with proof impressions of the
plates on Japan paper.


REDGRAVE, GILBERT R.--Erhard Ratdolt and his Work at Venice   A Paper
read before the Bibliographical Society, November 20, 1893, by Gilbert
R. Redgrave. London printed for the Bibliographical Society at the
Chiswick Press April 1894. _4to, original paper wrappers, uncut edges._

Ten plates, two of them in colours.

No. 1 of Illustrated Monographs issued by the Bibliographical Society.


REDGRAVE, RICHARD AND SAMUEL.--A Century of Painters of the English
School; with critical notices of their works, and an account of the
progress of the Art in England. By Richard Redgrave . . . and Samuel
Redgrave . . . London: Smith, Elder and Co. . . . 1866. _8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


REDGRAVE, SAMUEL.--A descriptive Catalogue of the Historical Collection
of Water-colour Paintings in the South Kensington Museum with an
introductory notice By Samuel Redgrave. . . . London: Chapman and Hall,
. . . 1877. _8vo, half light brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Twenty-one illustrations, some etchings, some in colour, after Turner
and others.


REED, ISAAC.--See Baker, Reed, and Jones. Goldsmith and Parnell.


REED AND CADWALADER.--A Reprint of the Reed and Cadwalader Pamphlets
with an Appendix   [Philadelphia]   MDCCCLXIII. _Royal 8vo, green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bradstreet's._

One hundred and ninety-nine copies printed for subscribers, including
the privately printed "Correspondence between William B. Reed and John
Penington and Son," not in all copies, though relating to this reprint.

Illustrated by the insertion of an autograph letter by William B. Reed
and forty-five portraits and views, including ten portraits of
Washington, six of Reed, and many others of exceeding rarity, engraved
by Edwin, Tiebout, B. B. E., Prevost, Bartolozzi, etc.


REEVE, CLARA.--See Walpole, Horace.


REFLEXIONS ON COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE.--See Swift, Jonathan.


REID, MAYNE.--The White Chief   A Legend of Northern Mexico. By Captain
Mayne Reid, . . . London: David Bogue, . . . 1855. . . . _Crown 8vo,
three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


REPTON, HUMPHRY.--Odd Whims; and Miscellanies, By Humphry Repton, Esq.
. . . "From grave to gay, from lively to severe." [vignette by H. R. Cook
after Repton] London: printed for William Miller, . . . by W. Bulmer and
Co. . . . 1804. _8vo, two volumes, light brown straight-grain morocco,
gilt edges._

Large paper copy, with ten coloured plates by Stadler after Repton and
H. Richter.


RERESBY, SIR JOHN.--The Memoirs and Travels of Sir John Reresby, Bart.
the former containing anecdotes, and secret history, of the Courts of
Charles II. and James II. the latter (now first published) exhibiting a
view of the governments and society in the principal states and courts
of Europe during the time of Cromwell's usurpation. London: printed for
Edward Jeffery, . . . 1813. _Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


RESCUE.--The Rescue. Inscribed to the Right Honourable Charles James
Fox. . . . London: Printed for J. Debrett, (Successor to Mr. Almon,) . . .
M. DCC. LXXXIII. _4to, paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._


REYNARD THE FOX. A renowned Apologue of the Middle Age, reproduced in
Rhyme. Longmans, London M.DCCCXLV. _4to, purple levant morocco, back
and sides in mosaic, gilt edges, by Holloway._

Translated from the Low German "Rynke der Voss," bearing the name of
Heinrich von Alkmar, by S. Naylor. The title-page is printed in colours.


REYNARD THE FOX.--See Goethe, Wolfgang A.


REYNOLDS, JOHN.--The Pioneer History of Illinois, containing the
discovery, in 1673, and the history of the country to the year eighteen
hundred and eighteen, when the State government was organized. By John
Reynolds. Belleville, Ill. published by N. A. Randall. 1852. _8vo, red
levant morocco, gilt back, doubled with blue morocco, wide Derome
border, gilt edges, in a red morocco box, by Chambolle-Duru._


REYNOLDS, SIR JOSHUA.--Johnson and Garrick [Not published.] London:
printed by Nichols, Son, and Bentley, . . . 1816. _8vo, calf, side
panels blind-tooled, gilt top, uncut edges. Bound with "Dialogue between
Dr. Johnson and Mrs. Knowles."_

Two hundred copies privately printed and distributed by Lady Thomond,
Sir Joshua's niece.


REYNOLDS, SIR JOSHUA.--The Discourses of Sir Joshua Reynolds;
illustrated by explanatory notes & plates. By John Burnet . . . London:
James Carpenter . . . 1842. _4to, green levant morocco, back and sides
richly tooled, gilt edges, by J. Clarke._

Large paper copy, with engraved title and eleven plates, proofs on India
paper.


REYNOLDS, SIR JOSHUA.--The Discourses of Sir Joshua Reynolds   edited
and annotated by Edmund Gosse   London Kegan Paul, Trench & Co., . . .
MDCCCLXXXIIII. _Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with etched portrait, proof on Japan
paper.


REYNOLDS, SIR JOSHUA.--See Russell, John.


RHYMERS' CLUB.--The Book of the Rhymers' Club   London   Elkin Mathews
. . . 1892 . . . _Small 4to, half vellum, uncut edges._

No. 21 of fifty large paper copies printed.


RHYMERS' CLUB.--The Second Book of the Rhymers' Club. London: Elkin
Mathews & John Lane . . . 1894. _Small 4to, boards, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, seventy printed.


RICHARDS, GEORGE.--The Declaration of Independence; a poem: accompanied
by Odes, Songs, &c. Adapted to the Day. . . . By a Citizen of Boston.
Printed at Boston, Faust's Statue, No. 45, Newbury Street. MDCCXCIII.
_8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, side panels, doubled with white
watered silk, gilt borders, white silk guards, uncut edges, by Riviere._


RICHARDSON, CHARLES.--A new Dictionary of the English Language,
Combining Explanation with Etymology: and Illustrated by Quotations from
the best Authorities. The Words--with those of the same family, in
German, Dutch and Swedish, or in Italian, French and Spanish,--are
traced to their Origin. The Explanations are deduced from the primitive
Meaning through the various Usages. The Quotations are arranged
Chronologically from the earliest period to the beginning of the
present century. By Charles Richardson, . . . London: William
Pickering. 1844. _4to, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Volume III is the Supplement, without title-page.


RICHARDSON, SAMUEL.--Clarissa. or, the History of a Young Lady:
Comprehending The most Important Concerns of Private Life. And
particularly shewing, The Distresses that may attend the Misconduct
Both of Parent and Children, In Relation to Marriage. Published by
the Editor of Pamela. . . . London: Printed for S. Richardson: And
Sold by A. Millar, . . . J. and Ja. Rivington, . . . John Osborn, . . .
And by J. Leake, . . . M. DCC. XLVIII. _12mo, seven volumes, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


RICHARDSON, SAMUEL.--Clarissa. or, the History of a Young Lady:
comprehending the most Important Concerns of Private Life . . . The
Fourth Edition, in which many Passages and some Letters are restored
from the Original Manuscripts . . . London: Printed for S. Richardson . . .
MDCCLI. _8vo, seven volumes, calf, gilt edges, by Belz-Niedree._


RICHARDSON, SAMUEL.--The History of Sir Charles Grandison. In a Series
of Letters Published from the Originals, By the Editor of Pamela and
Clarissa. In Six Volumes. . . . London: Printed for S. Richardson; And
Sold by C. Hitch and L. Hawes, . . . M. DCC.LIV. _Post 8vo, six volumes,
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

First edition.


RICHARDSON, SAMUEL.--The Correspondence of Samuel Richardson, author of
Pamela, Clarissa, and Sir Charles Grandison. Selected from the Original
Manuscripts, bequeathed by him to his family, To which are prefixed, a
biographical account of that author, and observations on his writings.
By Anna Laetitia Barbauld. . . . London: printed for Richard Phillips, . . .
1804. . . . _12mo, six volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

Two portraits by Caroline Watson, one of Richardson after a painting by
Highmore, a view by T. Richards, and two coloured plates (folded), one
by Stadler.


RICHARDSON, SAMUEL.--The Works of Samuel Richardson. With a Sketch of
his Life and Writings, by the Rev. Edward Mangin . . . London: printed
for James Carpenter . . . 1811. _Crown 8vo, nineteen volumes, half red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Illustrated with a portrait and seventy-five inserted plates by Vinkeles
(proofs before letters), Stothard, Corbould, and Burney, some in two
states, the duplicates being proofs before letters or on India paper.


RIDLEY, JAMES.--The Tales of the Genii: or, the Delightful Lessons of
Horam the Son of Asmar. Translated from the Persian by Sir Charles
Morell . . . London: printed for James Wallis . . . 1805. _8vo, two
volumes, calf, gilt back, citron over rough edges, by Bedford._

Frontispieces and twelve plates from the designs of W. M. Craig.


RIPA, CAESAR.--Iconologia: or, Moral Emblems, by Caesar Ripa--Wherein are
Express'd, Various Images of Virtues, Vices, Passions, Arts,
Humours, Elements, and Celestial Bodies; As Design'd by The Ancient
Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, and Modern Italians: Useful For Orators,
Poets, Painters, Sculptors, and all Lovers of Ingenuity: Illustrated
with Three Hundred Twenty-six Humane Figures, With their Explanations;
Newly design'd, and engraven on Copper, by I. Fuller, Painter, And
other Masters. By the Care and at the Charge of P. Tempest. London:
Printed by Benj. Motte. MDCCIX. _4to, green levant morocco, back and
sides richly tooled, gilt edges, by David._

Frontispiece and eighty-one plates containing four figures each,
excepting the cuts 225-230, which occupy one plate.


RITSON, JOSEPH, _editor_.--Robin Hood: a Collection of all the ancient
Poems, Songs, and Ballads, now extant, relative to that celebrated
English Outlaw: to which are prefixed Historical Anecdotes of his Life.
London: printed for T. Egerton and J. Johnson, MDCCXCV. _Crown 8vo, two
volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Champs._

Woodcut illustrations.


RITSON, JOSEPH, _editor_.--Robin Hood: a collection of all the ancient
Poems, Songs, and Ballads, now extant, relative to that celebrated
English Outlaw: to which are prefixed historical anecdotes of his life.
London: printed for Longman . . . 1820. _18mo, boards, uncut edges._

Re-edited from Ritson's edition, with woodcuts by Bewick.


RITSON, JOSEPH, _editor_.--Robin Hood: a Collection of all the ancient
Poems, Songs, and Ballads, now extant relative to that celebrated
English Outlaw. To which are prefixed Historical Anecdotes of his Life.
By Joseph Ritson, Second Edition. London: William Pickering: 1832.
_Crown 8vo, two volumes, half blue levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

Edited by Joseph Frank with additions from the manuscript of Ritson and
the "Tale of Robin Hood and the Monk," which had escaped Ritson's
notice. The illustrations to the edition of 1795 are here printed to
better advantage.


RITSON, JOSEPH, _editor_.--Bibliotheca Poetica: a Catalogue of English
Poets, of the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth,
centurys, with a short account of their works . . . London: printed by
C. Roworth . . . for G. and W. Nicol . . . MDCCCII. _Crown 8vo, half
blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._


RITSON, JOSEPH, _editor_.--Northern Garlands. The Bishopric Garland; or
Durham Minstrel: A choice Collection of excellent Songs. The Yorkshire
Garland: A curious Collection of old and new Songs. The Northumberland
Garland; or Newcastle Nightingale: A matchless Collection of famous
Songs. The North-Country Chorister: An unparalleled Variety of
excellent Songs. Edited by the late Joseph Ritson, Esq. London: printed
for R. Triphook, 1810. _Crown 8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

The four separate titles are dated 1809.


RITSON, JOSEPH, _editor_.--Gammer Gurton's Garland: or, the Nursery
Parnassus. A choice collection of Pretty Songs and Verses, for the
Amusement of all little good children who can neither read nor run.
London: printed for R. Triphook . . . 1810. _Crown 8vo, red morocco,
gilt back, gilt edges, by Lewis. Bound with "Northern Garlands" and one
other work._


RITSON, JOSEPH, _editor_.--Gammer Gurton's Garland or the Nursery
Parnassus. A Choice Collection of Pretty Songs and Verses for the
Amusement of all Little Good Children who can neither read nor run.
London   1810   reprinted for Hugh Hopkins, Glasgow   1866. _Crown 8vo,
half blue levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Champs._

One hundred copies printed.


RITSON, JOSEPH, _editor_.--The Caledonian Muse: a chronological
selection of Scotish Poetry from the earliest times. Edited by the late
Joseph Ritson, Esq. with vignettes engraved by Heath after the designs
of Stothard. London: printed 1785: and now first published, by Robert
Triphook . . . 1821. _Crown 8vo, half blue levant morocco, gilt and
mosaic back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

Silhouette portrait of Ritson.


RITSON, JOSEPH.--The Life of King Arthur: from Ancient Historians and
Authentic Documents. By Joseph Ritson . . . London: printed for Payne
and Foss . . . 1825. _Crown 8vo, half brown levant morocco, gilt and
mosaic back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._


RITSON, JOSEPH.--Memoirs of The Celts or Gauls. By Joseph Ritson . . .
London: printed for Payne and Foss . . . 1827. _Crown 8vo, half blue
levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

Contains an Appendix with a Dictionary of Celtic Words, and a
Bibliotheca Celtica.


RITSON, JOSEPH.--Annals of the Caledonians, Picts, and Scots; and of
Strathclyde, Cumberland, Galloway, and Murray. By Joseph Ritson . . .
Edinburgh: printed for W. and D. Laing . . . 1828. _Crown 8vo, two
volumes, half lilac levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Champs._


RITSON, JOSEPH.--Letters from Joseph Ritson, Esq. to Mr. George Paton to
which is added, a critique by John Pinkerton, Esq. upon Ritson's
Scottish Songs. Edinburgh: printed for John Stevenson, . . .
M.DCCC.XXIX. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Bedford._

One hundred copies printed. An etched portrait of George Paton at the
age of sixty-four is inserted, a private plate.


RITSON, JOSEPH, _editor_.--Fairy Tales, now first collected: to which
are prefixed Two Dissertations: 1. On Pygmies. 2. On Fairies. By Joseph
Ritson . . . London: printed for Payne and Foss . . . and William
Pickering . . . 1831. _Crown 8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt and
mosaic back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._

Edited by Mr. Frank from a manuscript and prepared for the press by
Ritson.


RITSON, JOSEPH.--The Letters of Joseph Ritson, Esq. edited chiefly from
originals in the possession of his Nephew. To which is prefixed a Memoir
of the Author by Sir Harris Nicolas . . . London: William Pickering.
1833. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt and mosaic
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Champs._


ROBERTS, WILLIAM.--The Book-hunter in London   Historical and other
Studies of Collectors and Collecting with numerous portraits and
illustrations by W. Roberts . . . London   Elliot Stock, . . . 1895.
_Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


ROBERTS, WILLIAM.--Memorials of Christie's a Record of Art Sales from
1766 to 1896 by W. Roberts . . . London   George Bell and Sons   1897.
_Royal 8vo, two volumes, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy. Sixty-four plates and fourteen illustrations in the
text.


ROBERTSON, JOSEPH CLINTON.--See Percy Anecdotes.


ROBERTSON, WILLIAM.--The Works of Wm. Robertson . . . Oxford, published
by Talboys and Wheeler; and W. Pickering, London   MDCCCXXV. _Royal 8vo,
eight volumes, olive green morocco, gilt back and wide dentelle border
on the sides, gilt edges, by Lewis._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with five portraits, proofs on India
paper.


ROBIN HOOD.--See Ritson, Joseph.


ROBINSON, J. C.--South Kensington Museum. Italian Sculpture of the
Middle Ages and Period of the Revival of Art. A Descriptive Catalogue of
the Works forming the above section of the Museum, with additional
Illustrative Notices. By J. C. Robinson, . . . London: Chapman and
Hall, . . . 1862. _8vo, cloth, red edges._

Twenty plates.


ROBINSON, J. C.--The Treasury of Ornamental Art. Illustrations of
objects of Art and Vertu. Photographed from the originals and drawn on
stone by F. Bedford, with descriptive notices by J. C. Robinson . . .
London. Pubd. by Day & Son . . . [n. d.] _Royal 8vo, red levant morocco,
gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Seventy-one plates printed in gold and colours.


ROCK, DANIEL.--Textile Fabrics. By the Very Rev. Daniel Rock, D.D. With
numerous woodcuts. Published for the Committee of Council on Education
by Chapman and Hall, . . . 1876. _Royal 8vo, half green morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges._

One of fifty copies printed on large paper, with additional
illustrations. Sixteen woodcuts and seven added plates, four in colour
and three on India paper.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--The Pleasures of Memory. With some other Poems. By
Samuel Rogers, Esq. The Seventh Edition. London: printed for Cadell Jun.
and Davies . . . and Dilly . . . MDCCXCV. _Post 8vo, red morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Stikeman._

Four copper-plate engravings by Heath and Neagle, after designs by
Stothard and Westall.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--The Pleasures of Memory, with other Poems. By Samuel
Rogers, Esq. A new edition London: printed by Thomas Bensley . . . for
T. Cadell, Jun. and W. Davies . . . 1801. _Small 8vo, red morocco, gilt
edges._

Large paper copy.

Illustrated by a set of seven engravings by Westall, proofs on India
paper, mezzotint portrait of Mrs. Siddons by Turner, an unlettered proof
portrait of Rogers, by Meyer after Hoppner, and an autograph letter of
the author, Jan. 7, 1836, in addition to the fifteen exquisite vignettes
by Stothard.

From the collection of George Daniel.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--The Pleasures of Memory with other Poems. By Samuel
Rogers, Esq. A new edition. London: printed by Thomas Bensley . . .
1802. _Foolscap 8vo, brown morocco, gilt back, gilt edges (with rough
leaves), by Matthews._

Fifteen engravings by Heath after the designs of Stothard.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--The Pleasures of Memory, with other Poems. By Samuel
Rogers, Esq. A new edition, with Engravings on Wood by Mr. L. Clennell,
from Drawings by T. Stothard. . . . London: printed for T. Cadell . . .
by T. Bensley . . . 1810. _8vo, red levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt
edges, by Holloway._

Printed entirely on India paper, with an autograph letter of the author
inserted.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--An Epistle to a Friend, with other Poems. By the author
of "The Pleasures of Memory"   London: printed by R. Noble, for T.
Cadell, junior, and W. Davies . . . 1798. _4to, olive morocco, gilt back
and sides, gilt edges, by Lewis._

First edition.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--The Voyage of Columbus. A Poem. [T. Bensley and Son,
London 1812.] _4to, red levant morocco, elaborately tooled on back and
sides, gilt edges, by Matthews._

Large paper copy, presumably unique, with twenty-six illustrations
inserted, including India proofs of the Stothard woodcuts, several fine
steel engravings from the designs of Turner and Stothard, and the
portrait of Rogers by Meyer after Hoppner, all proofs and for the most
part on India paper.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--Poems by Samuel Rogers   London: printed for T. Cadell
and W. Davies . . . by T. Bensley and Son . . . 1816. _Foolscap 8vo,
brown morocco, gilt back, gilt over rough edges, by Matthews._

Title-page on India paper and sixty-four woodcuts by Luke Clennell from
drawings by Thomas Stothard.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--Poems by Samuel Rogers . . . London: printed for T.
Cadell . . . 1827. _Foolscap 8vo, boards, uncut edges._

Woodcut illustrations by Stothard.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--Poems by Samuel Rogers. London: printed for T. Cadell,
. . . and E. Moxon . . . 1834. _Crown 8vo, original boards, uncut
edges._

The first edition to contain the seventy-three proof engravings by
Finden, Goodall, and six others, after the designs of Stothard, Turner,
Flaxman(1), Parmagiano (1), and Callot (1).


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--Poems. 1834. [_Crown 8vo_] _enlarged to two volumes
4to, green levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by
Matthews_.

Another proof copy, inlaid to quarto, and illustrated by the insertion
of one hundred and twenty-six plates and an autograph letter of the
author. Many of the original illustrations by Turner and Stothard are
duplicated on India paper, and a large proportion of the portraits and
views inserted are first proofs.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--Human Life, a poem. By Samuel Rogers. London: John
Murray, . . . 1819. _Post 8vo, boards, uncut edges._

First edition, large and thick paper copy.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--Italy, a Poem . . . London: printed for Longman. . . .
[and] John Murray 1822 [-'28.] _Small 8vo, two volumes in one, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition of both parts.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--Italy, a poem. By Samuel Rogers. London: printed for T.
Cadell, . . . 1830. _Crown 8vo, original boards, uncut edges._

First issue of the fourth (?) edition, but the first with the engravings
by Finden, Goodall, Wallis, and ten others after the designs of
Stothard, Turner, Vasari (1), and Captain Batty (1).

The tomb on page 91 should be on page 88. Later issues transpose the
vignettes.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--Italy, a Poem. 1830. [_8vo_] _extended to two volumes,
4to, blue levant morocco, back and sides covered with a typical Grolier
pattern, gilt edges, by David_.

Another copy, inlaid on Whatman paper to quarto size, with one hundred
and ninety-two inserted plates, including double and triple states of
the Turner and Stothard illustrations, scenes and views, proofs on
India paper, and numerous portraits. An immaculate collection of proofs
and engraver's etchings.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--Italy, a poem. By Samuel Rogers. London: Edward Moxon
. . . 1844. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Woodcut illustrations by T. Stothard.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--Recollections of the Table-Talk of Samuel Rogers. To
which is added Porsoniana. [by the Rev. Alexander Dyce]   London: Edward
Moxon . . . MDCCCLVI. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


ROGERS, SAMUEL.--Recollections. By Samuel Rogers. Second edition.
[Edited by William Sharpe] London: Longman, Green, Longman, and Roberts,
1859. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


ROGET, PETER MARK.--Animal and Vegetable Physiology considered with
reference to Natural Theology by Peter Mark Roget, M. D. . . . Third
edition with numerous additions and emendations [463 woodcuts] London
William Pickering   1840. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Bridgewater Treatise No. 5.


ROLAND, GEORGE.--An Introductory Course of Fencing. By George Roland, . . .
Second edition. Edinburgh: published by the author, . . . [n. d.]
_8vo, cloth._


RONALDS, ALFRED.--The Fly-Fishers Entomology. Illustrated by colored
representations of the natural and artificial Insect. And accompanied by
a few observations and Instructions relative to Trout and Grayling
Fishing. By Alfred Ronalds. With nineteen copper plates [all coloured]
London: Longman, &c . . . 1836. _8vo, original cloth, uncut edges._


ROOSEVELT, J. WEST, _editor_.--In Sickness and in Health   a Manual of
Domestic Medicine and Surgery, Hygiene, Dietetics, and Nursing, dealing
in a practical way with the problems relating to the maintenance of
health, the prevention and treatment of disease, and the most effective
aid in emergencies by George Waldo Crary, M. D.   Frederic S. Lee, Ph.
D.   Josiah Royce, Ph. D. [nine others] and J. West Roosevelt, M. D.
editor   New York   D. Appleton and Company   1896. _Royal 8vo, brown
morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Four coloured plates, and numerous illustrations in the text.


ROPES, JOHN CODMAN.--The Story of the Civil War   a concise account of
the war in the United States of America between 1861 and 1865   by John
Codman Ropes . . . with maps and plans . . . G. P. Putnam's Sons   New
York . . . 1900. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


ROSCOE, THOMAS, _translator_.--The Italian Novelists: selected from the
most approved authors in that language; from the earliest period down to
the close of the eighteenth century: arranged in an historical and
chronological series. Translated from the original Italian. Accompanied
with Notes, critical and biographical. By Thomas Roscoe. London: printed
for Septimus Prowett . . . 1825. _Crown 8vo, four volumes, half orange
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


ROSCOE, THOMAS, _translator_.--The German Novelists: Tales selected from
Ancient and Modern Authors in that language: from the earliest period
down to the close of the eighteenth century. Translated from the
originals: with critical and biographical notices. By Thomas Roscoe.
London: Henry Colburn . . . 1826. _Crown 8vo, four volumes, half orange
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


ROSCOE, THOMAS, _translator_.--The Spanish Novelists: A Series of Tales,
from the earliest period to the close of the Seventeenth Century.
Translated from the Originals, with Critical and Biographical Notices by
Thomas Roscoe   London: Richard Bentley . . . 1832. _Crown 8vo, three
volumes, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


ROSCOE, WILLIAM.--The Life and Pontificate of Leo the Tenth. . . . By
William Roscoe. . . . [papal insignia]   Liverpool: printed by J.
McCreery; . . . 1805. _8vo, four volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

First edition. Four portraits by Moses Haughton after Raffaelo, Giovan
Bellino, and Aldegrever, and woodcut vignettes.


ROSCOE, WILLIAM.--The Life and Pontificate of Leo the Tenth. By William
Roscoe. Fourth edition. Revised by his son, Thomas Roscoe. London: Henry
G. Bohn . . . 1846. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Two portraits, and numerous woodcut illustrations.


ROSCOE, WILLIAM.--Illustrations, historical and critical, of the Life of
Lorenzo de' Medici, called the Magnificent; with an Appendix of original
and other documents. By William Roscoe. London: printed for T. Cadell . . .
1822. _8vo, blue straight-grain morocco, gilt back, side borders,
with the arms of Francois I, King of the Two Sicilies, 1777-1830, on
both covers, inside panels and linings of yellow silk, gilt edges._

Portrait, three plates, and two engraved medals.

Supplementary to all preceding editions.


ROSCOE, WILLIAM.--The Life of Lorenzo de' Medici, called the
Magnificent. By William Roscoe. The sixth edition, corrected. London:
Printed for T. Cadell . . . 1825. _8vo, two volumes, blue straight-grain
morocco, rich gilt back and side border, arms of the Medici family on
both covers, yellow silk linings, gilt edges._

Portrait engraved by Haughton.


ROSCOE, WILLIAM STANLEY.--Poems by William Stanley Roscoe   London:
William Pickering. 1834. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


ROSE, JAMES ANDERSON, _editor_.--A Collection of Engraved Portraits;
catalogued and exhibited by James Anderson Rose, at the opening of the
new library and museum of the Corporation of London, November, 1872.
With a Preface on Engraving, and on the best mode of arranging a
collection of prints or engraved portraits. Illustrated by a portrait of
Mrs. Susanna Rose, engraved by C. G. Lewis, from the original picture by
Frederick Sandys; and one hundred portraits produced in permanent
photography. London: Marcus Ward and Co. 1874. _4to, half vellum, gilt
top, uncut edges._

No. 72 of a limited number of large paper copies printed.


ROSEBERY, ARCHIBALD PHILIP PRIMROSE, LORD.--Napoleon the last phase
London   Arthur L. Humphreys   1900. _8vo, cloth._

First edition.


ROSINI, GIOVANNI.--History of Painting in Italy illustrated by its
Monuments. By Giovanni Rosini. New [second] edition, with a list of the
plates and alphabetical and topographical indexes, in English. Pisa
(Niccolo Capurro) MDCCCXLVIII.-LII. _8vo, seven volumes, half brown
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait of Rosini, four hundred and eighty-five outline engravings, and
title-frontispieces in gold and colours.

The body of this work is in Italian.


ROS ROSARUM ex horto poetarum. Dew of the ever-living Rose Gathered from
The Poets' Gardens of many Lands by "E. V. B."   London   Elliot Stock
. . . 1885. _Crown 8vo, grey silk embroidered in a conventional design of
red flowers, figured silk linings, gilt over uncut edges, with the
original covers, in a figured silk case, by The Club Bindery._

Whatman paper copy, fifty printed, with numerous woodcut illustrations.


ROSSETTI, CHRISTINA GEORGINA.--Goblin Market and other poems. By
Christina Rossetti. With two designs by D. G. Rossetti. Cambridge
Macmillan and Co . . . 1862. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


ROSSETTI, CHRISTINA GEORGINA.--Goblin Market   the Prince's Progress and
other poems by Christina G. Rossetti with four designs by D. G.
Rossetti. London   Macmillan and Co. 1875. _Post 8vo, cloth._


ROSSETTI, CHRISTINA GEORGINA.--Goblin Market by Christina Rossetti
illustrated by Laurence Housman   1893   Macmillan & Co   London. _Royal
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred and sixty printed. Woodcut title-page,
twelve full-page illustrations, and numerous cuts in the text.


ROSSETTI, CHRISTINA GEORGINA.--The Prince's Progress and other poems. By
Christina Rossetti. With two designs by D. G. Rossetti. London:
Macmillan and Co. 1866.   _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


ROSSETTI, CHRISTINA GEORGINA.--A Pageant and other poems by Christina G.
Rossetti   London   Macmillan and Co. 1881. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL, _translator_.--The Earlier Italian Poets from
Ciullo d' Alcamo to Dante Alighieri (1100-1200-1300) in the original
metres together with Dante's Vita Nuova translated by D. G. Rossetti . . .
London: Smith, Elder and Co . . . 1861. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition of the first volume published by Rossetti.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL, _translator and editor_.--Dante and his Circle:
With the Italian Poets preceding Him. (1100-1200-1300). A collection of
Lyrics, edited, and translated in the original metres, by Dante Gabriel
Rossetti. Revised and re-arranged edition . . . London: Ellis and White
. . . 1874. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Frontispiece from the edition of 1861, inserted.

This work is essentially the same as "The Early Italian Poets." The
chief difference is that the order of arrangement has been reversed,
Dante and his contemporaries being here placed first, and the other
poets second.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL, _translator and editor_.--Dante and his Circle
with the Italian Poets preceding him (1100-1200-1300)   A Collection of
Lyrics translated in the original metres by Dante Gabriel Rossetti . . .
a new edition with preface by William M. Rossetti. Ellis and Elvey
London   1892. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, thirty-five printed.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--Poems by Dante Gabriel Rossetti. London: F. S.
Ellis . . . 1870. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First published collected edition.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--Poems. 1870. _8vo, original boards, uncut
edges._

Another copy, one of twenty-five printed on large paper.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--Ballads and Sonnets by Dante Gabriel Rossetti.
Second edition. London: Ellis and White . . . 1881. _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL--Ballads and Sonnets by Dante Gabriel Rossetti.
London: Ellis and White, . . . [Chiswick Press] 1881. _8vo, original
boards, uncut edges._

One of twenty-five copies printed on large paper.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--The Blessed Damozel   by Dante Gabriel
Rossetti   with [20] drawings by Kenyon Cox   New York: Dodd, Mead and
Company: [De Vinne Press] M DCCC LXXXVI. _Folio, decorated vellum
boards, gilt top, uncut edges._

One of thirty-five copies printed, with proof impressions on India
paper.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--The Blessed Damozel   By D. G. Rossetti
Introduction By W. M. Rossetti   Decorations By W. B. Macdougall
London   Duckworth & Co. 1898. _4to, grey satin, embroidered in a design
of small pink flowers and foliage, green silk linings, gilt over uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

No. 42 of sixty-five copies printed on Japanese vellum.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--The Collected Works of Dante Gabriel Rossetti
   edited with preface and notes by William M Rossetti . . . Ellis and
Scrutton London 1886. _8vo, two volumes in four, original boards, uncut
edges._

One of twenty-five copies printed on large paper.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--The Collected Works of Dante Gabriel Rossetti
   edited with preface and notes by William M. Rossetti . . . Ellis and
Elvey London 1887. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--The Poetical Works of Dante Gabriel Rossetti
edited with preface by William M. Rossetti   A new edition in one volume
[etched portrait]   Ellis and Elvey   London 1891 . . . _8vo, original
boards, uncut edges._


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--Sonnets and Lyrical Poems. By Dante Gabriel
Rossetti   [Ellis & Elvey, London 1893]   _8vo, vellum covers, uncut
edges._

Three hundred and ten copies printed by William Morris at the Kelmscott
Press.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--Sonnets and Lyrical Poems. 1893. _8vo, vellum
wrappers, uncut edges._

Printed upon vellum.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--Ballads and Narrative Poems by Dante Gabriel
Rossetti   [Ellis & Elvey, London 1893]   _8vo, vellum covers, uncut
edges._

Three hundred and ten copies printed by William Morris at the Kelmscott
Press.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--Ballads and Narrative Poems. 1893. _8vo,
vellum wrappers, uncut edges._

Printed upon vellum.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--The House of Life by Dante Gabriel Rossetti
being now for the first time given in its full text. Copeland and Day.
Boston. MDCCCXCIV. _Square 8vo, original Japan paper covers, uncut
edges._

An unauthorized edition.

Printed on Michallat paper, fifty copies so issued, with rubricated
initials and three borders designed by B. G. Goodhue.

In spite of the reading of the title-page, The House of Life was printed
in its entirety in the Poems, 1870. Until the present edition was
published, one of the sonnets was never thereafter printed with the
Cycle.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--Hand and Soul. By Dante Gabriel Rossetti.
[Colophon] [** symbol] Here ends Hand and Soul, written by Dante
Gabriel Rossetti, and reprinted from The Germ for Messrs. Way and
Williams of Chicago, by William Morris, at the Kelmscott Press, Upper
Mall, Hammersmith [** symbol] Finished the 24th day of October,
1895. [** symbol] Sold by William Morris at the Kelmscott Press.
_16mo, vellum boards, uncut edges._

Two woodcut borders.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--Dante Gabriel Rossetti   his family-letters
with a memoir   by William Michael Rossetti . . . London   Ellis and
Elvey   1895. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, half vellum, gilt top, uncut
edges._

No. 17 of fifty large paper copies printed, with ten portraits and a
facsimile.


ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.--See Sharp, William.


ROSSETTI, MARIA FRANCESCA.--A Shadow of Dante Being an Essay towards
studying himself, his world and his pilgrimage   by Maria Francesca
Rossetti. Rivingtons . . . London   MDCCCLXXXIV. _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

Five illustrations.


ROSSETTI, WILLIAM MICHAEL.--Swinburne's Poems and Ballads. A Criticism
by William Michael Rossetti. London: John Camden Hotten . . . 1866.
_Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


ROSSETTI AND SWINBURNE.--Notes on the Royal Academy Exhibition, 1868.
Part I. by Wm. Michael Rossetti. Part II. by Algernon C. Swinburne. . . .
London: John Camden Hotten, . . . [1868]   _8vo, paper._


ROSSETTI, WILLIAM MICHAEL.--Life of John Keats. By William Michael
Rossetti. London   Walter Scott . . . 1887. _Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt top,
uncut edges._

First edition.


ROSSETTI, WILLIAM MICHAEL, _editor_.--Ruskin: Rossetti: Preraphaelitism
papers 1854 to 1862   arranged and edited by William Michael Rossetti . . .
with [15] illustrations   London   George Allen, . . . 1899. . . .
_4to, half buckram, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 227 of two hundred and fifty copies printed on hand-made paper.


ROSSETTI, WILLIAM MICHAEL.--See Dante.


ROVIGO, DUKE OF.--See Savary, Anne-Jean.


ROWE, NICHOLAS.--The Ambitious Step-mother. A Tragedy. As 't was Acted
at the New Theatre in Little-Lincolns-Inn-Fields. By His Majesty's
Servants. By N. Rowe, Esq;. [One line from Ovid, four from Virgil]
London, Printed for Peter Buck, . . . 1701. _4to, dark brown calf,
centre ornaments on the sides, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Second edition. A-L in fours, title on A1. Dedicated to the Earl of
Jersey.


ROWE, NICHOLAS.--Tamerlane. A Tragedy. As it is Acted At the New Theater
in Little Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. By His Majesty's Servants   Written by
N. Rowe Esq; [Three lines from Virgil] London, Printed for Jacob
Tonson, . . . 1702. _4to, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges,
by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A2-A4 unlettered, b1-b4, and B-K in fours, title on A2.
Dedicated to William, Marquis of Hartington.


ROWE, NICHOLAS.--The Fair Penitent. A Tragedy. As it is Acted at the New
Theatre in Little-Lincolns-Inn-Fields. By Her Majesty's Servants.
Written by N. Rowe, Esq; [Line from Virg. AEn. Lib. 4.] London, Printed
for Jacob Tonson, within Grays-Inn Gate next Grays-Inn Lane. 1703.
_4to, half maroon, straight-grain morocco, gilt edges, by Riviere._

First edition.

Collation: Title, A2 (verso blank). Dedication to the Duchess of Ormond,
A3-a1. Prologue, a2. Epilogue, a3. "Dramatis Personae," a 4 verso
(recto blank). Text, B1-I3 recto, in fours. Pages 1-61. "Books Printed,"
I3 verso-I4 (verso "Advertisement").


ROWE, NICHOLAS.--The Fair Penitent. 1703. _4to, brown levant morocco,
gilt back, side ornaments, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Another issue of the first edition.

The title-page and text of this copy are similar to the preceding, but
it contains a half-title, A1, and no final advertisements, I3 verso and
I4 being blank.


ROWE, NICHOLAS.--Ulysses. A Tragedy. As it is Acted at the Queen's
Theatre in the Hay-Market. By Her Majesty's Sworn Servants. Written by
N. Rowe, Esq; [Three lines from Horace]   London, Printed for Jacob
Tonson, . . . 1706. _4to, green levant morocco, gilt back, side
borders, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. Two leaves (half-title and title), A-I in fours, and
final leaf of advertisement. Dedicated to Sidney, Lord Godolphin.


ROWE, NICHOLAS.--The Royal Convert. A Tragedy. As it is Acted at the
Queen's Theatre in the Hay-Market. By Her Majesty's Sworn Servants.
Written by N. Rowe, Esq; Laudatur & Alget. London: Printed for Jacob
Tonson, . . . 1708. _4to, old red morocco, gilt back and sides, the
Halifax arms on both covers, gilt edges._

First edition. Two leaves (half-title and title) and A-H in fours.

The dedication copy to Charles, Lord Halifax, with his arms on the
sides.


ROWE, NICHOLAS.--The Tragedy of Jane Shore. Written in Imitation of
Shakespear's Style. By N. Rowe, Esq; [Two lines from Virgil] London:
Printed for Bernard Lintott, . . . [1713] _4to, Spanish calf, gilt back,
gilt edges, by Pratt._

First edition. A-I in fours, title on A1. Dedicated to the Duke of
Queensbury.


[ROWE, NICHOLAS.]--A Review of the Tragedy of Jane Shore Consisting of
Observations on the Characters, Manners, Stile, and Sentiments. London:
Printed by J. Roberts . . . [n. d.] _4to, olive levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt over uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._


ROWE, NICHOLAS.--Poems on Several Occasions. By N. Rowe, Esq; London:
Printed for E. Curll . . . 1714. _4to, citron levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


ROWE, NICHOLAS.--The Tragedy of the Lady Jane Gray. As it is Acted at
the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. By N. Rowe Esq; [Two lines in Latin]
London, Printed for Bernard Lintott . . . 1715. _4to, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A1-A4, a1-a2, and B-K2 in fours, title on A1. Dedicated
to the Princess of Wales.


ROWE, NICHOLAS.--The Works of Nicholas Rowe, Esq; . . . London: Printed
for H. Lintot, J. and R. Tonson and S. Draper MDCCXLVII. _12mo, two
volumes, contemporary blue morocco, back and sides richly ornamented,
gilt edges._

Portrait of Rowe and folded plate of his monument, both engraved by
Vertue.


ROWE, NICHOLAS.--The Works of Nicholas Rowe, Esq . . . A new edition.
Ornamented with copper-plates. To which is prefixed a Life of the
Author. London: Printed for W. Lowndes; J. Nichols; S. Bladon; and W.
Nicoll. MDCCXCII. _12mo, two volumes, sprinkled calf, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Portrait of Rowe and plate of his monument, four plates by Du Guernier,
etc., also (inserted) eleven portraits of actresses in character.


ROWE, NICHOLAS.--See Lucan. Quillet, Claudius.


ROYAL FAMILY.--The Royal Family Described, or; the Character of

  King James I.
  King Charles I.
  King Charles II.
  King James II.
  with the Pedegree of Queen Anne.

Written by the Author of The Rights of the King and Subiect Briefly
Stated, &c. London, Printed and Sold by Benj. Bragg, at the Blue-Ball in
Ave-Mary Lane. 1702. _4to, morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery.
Bound with JAMES WRIGHT'S "Burley on the Hill" and "Fortune's Bounty."_

Collation: Title, A1 (verso blank). Text, A2-A4. Pages 1-8.


RUFFHEAD, OWEN.--The Life of Alexander Pope, Esq. compiled from original
manuscripts; with a critical essay on his writings and genius. By Owen
Ruffhead, Esq. London: Printed for C. Bathurst . . . MDCCLXIX. _8vo,
boards, uncut edges._

Frontispiece, Pope's monument, engraved by Ravenet.


RUNIC POETRY.--See Percy, Bishop.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Seven Lamps of Architecture. By John Ruskin . . .
with illustrations, drawn and etched by the author. London: Smith,
Elder, and Co. . . . 1849. _Royal 8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition: with fourteen plates.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Seven Lamps of Architecture. 1849. _Royal 8vo, brown
levant morocco, gilt back and side panels in the manner of Roger Payne,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Another copy.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Seven Lamps of Architecture. By John Ruskin . . .
with illustrations drawn by the Author. Second edition. London: Smith,
Elder, and Co. . . . 1855. _Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Fourteen plates, carefully re-etched by Cuff, the original etchings by
the author not being satisfactory.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Seven Lamps of Architecture. By John Ruskin, . . .
With [14] illustrations, drawn by the author. New edition. George Allen,
Sunnyside, Orpington, Kent. [Chiswick Press] 1880. _Royal 8vo, boards,
uncut edges._


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Notes on the Construction of Sheepfolds. By John Ruskin,
. . . London: Smith, Elder and Co., . . . 1851. _8vo, half brown levant
morocco, gilt back, uncut edges._

First edition.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Stones of Venice . . . The Foundations [The
Sea-Stories, 1853, and The Fall, 1853.] by John Ruskin . . . with
illustrations drawn by the author. London: Smith, Elder, and Co., . . .
1851.[-'53.] _Royal 8vo, three volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back
and side panels in the manner of Roger Payne, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First edition, with fifty-three plates, some coloured, and woodcuts.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The King of the Golden River; or The Black Brothers: A
Legend of Stiria. Illustrated by Richard Doyle. London: Smith, Elder &
Co., . . . MDCCCLI. _Square 8vo, original boards._

First edition. Frontispiece, frontispiece-title, and numerous woodcuts.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Lectures on Architecture and Painting, delivered at
Edinburgh in November, 1853. By John Ruskin, . . . With (15)
Illustrations drawn by the Author. Second edition. London: Smith, Elder
& Co. . . . 1855. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Modern Painters. . . . By John Ruskin . . . London:
Smith, Elder, and Co. . . . 1857. [-'56-'60] _Royal 8vo, five volumes,
brown levant morocco, gilt back and side panels in the manner of Roger
Payne, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Volumes I and II, dated 1857 and 1856, are sixth and fourth editions,
respectively. Volumes III-V, 1856, 1856, and 1860, are first editions.

Illustrated with eighty-seven plates by Armytage, William Holl, and
others after the designs of J. M. W. Turner, the author, etc., and two
hundred and sixteen woodcuts.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Political Economy of Art: being the substance (with
additions) of two lectures delivered at Manchester, July 10th. and 13th,
1857. By John Ruskin, . . . London: Smith, Elder and Co., . . . 1857.
_16mo, original cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Elements of Drawing; in three letters to beginners.
By John Ruskin, . . . with illustrations, drawn by the author. London:
Smith, Elder, & Co., . . . 1857. _Crown 8vo, original cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Elements of Perspective arranged for the use of
schools and intended to be read in connexion with the first three books
of Euclid. By John Ruskin, . . . London   Smith, Elder, and Co., . . .
1859. _Crown 8vo, original cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Elements of Perspective. 1859. . . . _Crown 8vo,
green morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

Another copy.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Two Paths: being Lectures on Art, and its application
to Decoration and Manufacture, delivered in 1859-60. By John Ruskin
London: Smith, Elder & Co., . . . 1859. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition: with two plates.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Sesame and Lilies. Two Lectures delivered at Manchester
in 1864, by John Ruskin   1. Of Kings' Treasuries. 2. Of Queens' Gardens
. . . London: Smith, Elder & Co., . . . 1865. _Post 8vo, original cloth,
gilt edges._

First edition.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Ethics of the Dust: Ten Lectures to Little Housewives
on the Elements of Crystallisation, by John Ruskin . . . London: Smith,
Elder & Co. . . . 1866. _Crown 8vo, original cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Queen of the Air: being a study of the Greek Myths of
Cloud and Storm. By John Ruskin . . . London: Smith, Elder & Co. . . .
1869. _Crown 8vo, original cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Lectures on Art delivered before the University of Oxford
in Hilary Term, 1870   by John Ruskin, . . . Oxford at the Clarendon
Press M. DCCC. LXX . . . _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Fors Clavigera. Letters to the Workmen and Labourers of
Great Britain. By John Ruskin, L.L.D. George Allen, Sunnyside,
Orpington, Kent. 1871 [-'80] _8vo, eight volumes, half red levant
morocco, uncut edges, by Carayon._

First edition of the First and Second Series, eighty-eight Letters in
all, with fifteen frontispieces and numerous text illustrations.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--St. Mark's Rest. The History of Venice written for the
help of the few travellers who still care for her monuments. George
Allen, Sunnyside, Orpington, Kent. 1877 [-'79] _Post 8vo, five parts,
original binding, gilt edges._

The Second Supplement was written by James Reddie Anderson and edited by
Ruskin.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Arrows of the Chace   being a collection of scattered
letters published chiefly in the daily newspapers,--1840[1841]-1880 by
John Ruskin, . . . and now edited by An Oxford Pupil. With preface by
the author. . . . George Allen, Sunnyside, Orpington, Kent. [Chiswick
Press] 1880. . . . _4to, two volumes, boards, uncut edges._

Frontispiece and other illustrations.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Elements of English Prosody for use in St. George's
Schools. Explanatory of the various terms used in "Rock Honeycomb." By
John Ruskin, . . . George Allen, Sunnyside, Orpington, Kent. 1880. _8vo,
original paper covers._


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Notes by Mr. Ruskin on Samuel Prout and William Hunt, in
illustration of a loan collection of drawings exhibited at the Fine Art
Society's Galleries, In 1879-80. Illustrated with Twenty Autotypes.
London: the Fine Art Society, . . . 1880. _Folio, half brown morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges._


RUSKIN, JOHN.--General Statement explaining the Nature and Purposes of
St. George's Guild. By John Ruskin, . . . George Allen, Sunnyside,
Orpington, Kent. 1882. _8vo, original paper covers._


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Poems by John Ruskin. Collected and edited by James
Osborne Wright. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 1884. _8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed. Portrait.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Art of England. Lectures given in Oxford, by John
Ruskin, . . . during his second tenure of the Slade Professorship.
George Allen, Sunnyside, Orpington, Kent. [1883] 1884. _4to, cloth,
uncut edges; the original parts bound together._

The Lectures are six: Realistic, Mythic, and Classic Schools of
Painting, Fairy Land, The Fireside, The Hill-side, and Appendix and
Index, which, with the general title, as above, is dated 1884. The
separate numbers were printed in 1883.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Gold   a dialogue connected with the subject of "Munera
Pulveris" by John Ruskin edited by H. Buxton Forman . . . London
printed by R. Clay and Sons limited   1891. _8vo, vellum paper covers,
uncut edges._

One of two copies printed on Japan paper.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Letters upon subjects of general interest from John
Ruskin to various correspondents. 1892. London: Privately Printed. (Not
for Sale) _8vo, original cloth, uncut edges._

First series.

Very few copies of these letters were printed. This copy has, inserted,
seventeen of the original letters, written and signed by Ruskin.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Stray Letters from Professor Ruskin to a London
Bibliopole   1892: London: Privately Printed (Not for Sale)   _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


RUSKIN, JOHN.--The Poetry of Architecture: or, the architecture of the
nations of Europe considered in its association with natural scenery and
natural character. By John Ruskin. With illustrations by the author.
George Allen, Sunnyside, Orpington, . . . 1893. _4to, half vellum, uncut
edges._

Coloured frontispiece and twenty-eight other illustrations.


RUSKIN AND ACLAND.--The Oxford Museum by Henry W. Acland, M. D. and John
Ruskin, M. A. Honorary Students of Christ Church   From original
Edition, 1859. With Additions in 1893   George Allen   London and
Orpington [Oxford, Horace Hart] 1893. _4to, half vellum, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Large paper copy. Three plates, including portraits of the authors,
besides a folded plan on Japan paper.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Three Letters and An Essay on Literature. By John Ruskin.
1836-1841. Found in his tutor's desk . . . Published by George Allen,
London & Orpington. MDCCCXCIII. _8vo, original cloth, uncut edges._

Two hundred copies printed on hand-made paper.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Letters from John Ruskin to William Ward. Edited by
Thomas J. Wise . . . London: Privately Printed. 1893. _8vo, two volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

A few copies printed, with facsimile frontispiece.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Letters on Art and Literature by John Ruskin. Edited by
Thomas J. Wise. London: Privately Printed. 1894. _8vo, original cloth,
uncut edges._

A few copies only printed by the Ashley Library.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Verona and other Lectures by John Ruskin . . . with
illustrations from Drawings by the Author   George Allen, Sunnyside,
Orpington . . . 1894. _4to, half vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, two hundred and fifty printed, with proofs of the
twelve plates on India paper.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--Letters from John Ruskin to Frederick J. Furnivall, M. A.
Hon. Dr. Phil. And other Correspondents. Edited by Thomas J. Wise.
London: Privately Printed 1897. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Thirty copies printed: with facsimile frontispiece, etc.


RUSKIN, JOHN.--See Rossetti, William Michael.


RUSSELL, ARTHUR T.--Memorials of the Life and Works of Thomas Fuller D.
D. by the Rev. Arthur T. Russell . . . London William Pickering 1844.
_Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


RUSSELL, JOHN.--Letters from a Young Painter abroad to his Friends in
England. Adorned with Copper Plates. [Four lines from Ovid] . . . The
Second Edition. London: Printed for W. Russel, . . . M DCCL. _8vo, two
volumes, tree calf, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by J. Clarke._

These letters are sometimes attributed to Sir Joshua Reynolds. The
second volume is dedicated to Sir John Cotton, of Stretton.

Thirteen plates, some coloured by hand, one signed by Boitard.


SA'DI.--The Gulistan or Rose Garden of Sa'di faithfully translated into
English. Printed by the Kama Shastra Society for Private Subscribers
only. Benares   1888. _Crown 8vo, half red morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges._


SAINT-AMAND, IMBERT DE.--The Women of the Court of Louis XV. Translated
from the French of Imbert de Saint-Amand   Boston   The Club of Odd
Volumes 1892. _4to, half cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Madame de Pompadour and of Louis XV in two states, coloured
and bistre.

No. 95 of one hundred and fifty copies printed upon Holland hand-made
paper.


SAINT-AMAND, IMBERT DE.--The Last Years of Louis XV. Translated from the
French of Imbert de Saint-Amand. Boston   The Club of Odd Volumes
1893. _4to, original boards, uncut edges._

One hundred and fifty copies printed, with portrait of Madame du Barry
in two states, in colours and bistre, and of Marie Antoinette in black
and bistre.


ST. AUGUSTINE.--The Confessions of S. Augustine in ten books   London
Kegan Paul, Trench Truebner & Co. Ltd. M DCCCC. _Square 8vo, blue levant
morocco, gilt and mosaic back, side panels of fillets and red mosaic in
scroll design, the intervals thickly studded with dots, doubled with
blue morocco, filleted borders, blue morocco guards, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

No. 29 of thirty copies printed upon Japanese vellum. Title-page by
Clemence Housman after Lawrence Housman, illustrations by Miss Housman
after Paul Woodroffe.


ST. JOHN, JAMES AUGUSTUS.--The History of the Manners and Customs of
Ancient Greece. By J. A. St. John. [map] London: Richard Bentley . . .
1842. _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


SAINTSBURY, GEORGE, _editor_.--Specimens of English Prose Style from
Malory to Macaulay selected and annotated with an introductory essay by
George Saintsbury . . . London   Kegan Paul, Trench & Co. [Chiswick
Press] M DCCC LXXXV. _8vo, paper wrappers, uncut edges._

No. 11 of fifty large paper copies printed.


SAINTSBURY, GEORGE.--See French Lyrics.


SAKOONTALA.--See Kalidasa.


SALTER, THOMAS FREDERICK.--The Angler's Guide, or complete London
Angler, containing the whole art of angling as practised in The Rivers
Thames and Lea, and other waters twenty miles round London, Founded on
Actual Experience: with the Art of Trolling for Jack or Pike [woodcut]
. . . By T. F. Salter, Gent . . . London, published for the author by T.
Tegg . . . 1814. _8vo, half morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition. Twelve woodcut illustrations, and inserted portrait of
the author, a proof on India paper.


SANDBY, WILLIAM.--The History of the Royal Academy of Arts from its
foundation in 1768 to the present time. With biographical notices of all
the members. By William Sandby. London: Longman . . . 1862. _8vo, two
volumes extended to three, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Bedford._

Illustrated by the insertion of two hundred and twenty-seven plates, of
which fifty-three are portraits and the rest examples of the artists
mentioned. The majority of these plates are proofs in various states,
including some fine examples by Bartolozzi.


SANFORD, EZEKIEL.--The Humours of Eutopia: a tale of colonial times. By
an Eutopian. . . . Philadelphia: Carey, Lea & Carey--1828. _12mo, two
volumes, figured brown silk, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


SARGENT, JOHN.--The Mine: a dramatic poem. To which are added Two
Historic Odes. By John Sargent, Esq. The fourth edition. London: Printed
by W. Flint . . . for T. Cadell and W. Davies . . . 1805. _Post 8vo,
half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Five plates engraved by Neagle, Hall, Collyer, and others after the
designs of Stothard.


SARGENT, JOHN OSBORNE.--See Holmes, O. W. The Harbinger.


SARGENT, WINTHROP.--The Life and Career of Major John Andre
Adjutant-General of the British Army in America. By Winthrop Sargent. . . .
Boston: Ticknor and Fields. MDCCCLXI. _8vo, original cloth, uncut
edges._

Large paper copy, seventy-five printed, with a steel portrait of Andre
by Hall.


SARTAIN, JOHN.--On the Antique Painting in encaustic of Cleopatra
discovered in 1818. Philadelphia: George Gebbie & Co. 1885. _4to,
cloth._

Mezzotint frontispiece and twenty-four other illustrations.


SATCHELL, THOMAS.--See Westwood, Thomas.


"SATIRICUS SCULPTOR."--See Ireland, W. H.


SATIRIST.--The Satirist: In Imitation of The Fourth Satire of The First
Book of Horace. . . . London: Printed for L. G.[illiver] and Sold by
Mrs. Dodd . . . Mrs. Nutt, . . . M DCC XXXIII. . . . _Folio, boards, by
The Club Bindery._


SAUNDERS, JAMES.--The Compleat Fisherman. Being A Large and Particular
Account, of all the several Ways of Fishing now practised in Europe;
with abundance of curious Secrets and Niceties in the Art of Fishing, as
well in the Sea, as in Lakes, Meers, Ponds, Rivers or Brooks; whether by
Darts, Spears, Harpoons, Nets, Hook and Line, or any other way
whatsoever. More particularly calculated For the Sport of Angling. With
Directions for preparing the Angle Rods, Lines, Hooks, and Baits, proper
for every part of the Sport respectively; and also for the Angler's
Conduct in rightly applying them. Also, an Account of all the principal
Rivers, Lakes, &c. in England; and what Kinds of Fish are more
especially found in them. Collected from the best Authors, And from the
long Experience of James Saunders, Esq; of Newton-Awbery, upon the River
Trent. London: Printed for W. Mears, . . . and S. Tooke, and B. Motte,
. . . 1724. _12mo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Riviere._

First edition.


SAVAGE, RICHARD, _editor_.--Miscellaneous Poems and Translations. By
several Hands. Publish'd by Richard Savage, Son of the late Earl
Rivers. . . . London: Printed for Samuel Chapman, . . . M DCC XXVI.
_8vo, red morocco, gilt edges._

Large paper copy of the first edition.


SAVAGE, RICHARD.--The Bastard. A poem, Inscribed with all due
Reverence to Mrs. Bret, once Countess of Macclesfield. By Richard
Savage, Son of the late Earl Rivers. . . . London: Printed for T.
Worrall, . . . 1728. _8vo, boards, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


SAVAGE, RICHARD.--The Wanderer: a poem. In Five Canto's. By Richard
Savage, Son of the late Earl Rivers. . . . London: Printed for J.
Walthoe, . . . 1729. . . . _8vo, brown morocco, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


SAVAGE, RICHARD.--Sir Thomas Overbury: a tragedy. Altered from the late
Mr. Richard Savage. [by William Woodfall]   As now performing at the
Theatre-Royal in Covent-Garden. London: printed by William Woodfall; for
Francis Newbery, . . . M. DCC. LXX VII. . . . _8vo, red morocco, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition. Dedicated by the editor to George Colman.

Prologue by Sheridan, Epilogue by Cumberland. A-L6 in fours.


SAVAGE, RICHARD.--The Works of Richard Savage, Esq. son of the Earl
Rivers. With an account of the Life and Writings of the author, by
Samuel Johnson, L.L.D. London: printed for T. Evans . . . MDCCLXXVII.
_8vo, two volumes, citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._

The title-page vignettes are supplemented by ten inserted plates, some
in two states.


SAVAGE, WILLIAM.--Practical Hints on Decorative Printing, with
Illustrations engraved on wood, and printed in colours at the type
press. By William Savage. London: published for the proprietor, by
Messrs. Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, . . . 1822. _Royal 4to,
half maroon levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Coloured title-page, the arms of the Earl of Spencer in colour, and
forty-six other illustrations, in various states.


SAVARY, ANNE-JEAN: DUC DE ROVIGO.--Memoirs of the Duke of Rovigo, (M.
Savary,) written by himself: illustrative of the history of the Emperor
Napoleon. . . . London: Henry Colburn, . . . 1828. _8vo, eight parts in
four volumes, blue morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._


SAVOY, THE.--The Savoy   an illustrated quarterly. January   1896
[December 1896]   Leonard Smithers. London   1896. _4to, three volumes,
original cloth, uncut edges._

The eight parts complete, edited by Arthur Symons and illustrated by
Aubrey Beardsley.


SAXE, JOHN GODFREY.--Clever Stories of many nations. Rendered in rhyme
by John G. Saxe. Illustrated by W. L. Champney. Boston: Ticknor and
Fields. 1865. _Small 4to, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Matthews._

First edition.


SCARRON, PAUL.--The Comic Romance of Monsieur Scarron, translated by
Oliver Goldsmith. In two volumes. . . . London: Printed for W. Griffin,
. . . 1775. _12mo, two volumes, maroon levant morocco, gilt back, side
borders in the manner of Derome, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


SCHARF, GEORGE.--See Boaden, Forster, and others.


SCHILLER, FRIEDRICH VON.--The Poems and Ballads of Schiller. Translated
by Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton . . . With a brief sketch of Schiller's
Life. . . . William Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh . . . MDCCCXLIV.
_Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


SCHLEGEL, FREDERICK.--Lectures on the History of Literature ancient and
modern from the German of Frederick Schlegel   New edition   William
Blackwood and Sons   Edinburgh and London   M.DCCC.XLVI. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


SCHLIEMANN, HENRY.--Troy and its Remains; a narrative of researches and
discoveries made on the site of Ilium, and in the Trojan plain. By Dr.
Henry Schliemann. Translated with the Author's Sanction. Edited By
Philip Smith, . . . With map, plans, views, and cuts, representing 500
objects of antiquity discovered on the Site. London: John Murray, . . .
1875. . . . _Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Inserted is an autograph letter from Dr. Schliemann.


SCHOPENHAUER, ARTHUR.--Two Essays by Arthur Schopenhauer. I. On the
Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason. II. On the Will in
Nature. A literal translation. George Bell and Sons, . . . [Chiswick
Press] 1889. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


SCHOPENHAUER, ARTHUR.--The Wisdom of Life being the first part of
Arthur Schopenhauer's Aphorismen zur Lebensweisheit . . . translated
with a preface by T. Bailey Saunders, . . . Second edition   London Swan
Sonnenschein & Co. . . . 1891. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


SCIENTIFIC WORKS.--Library of Illustrated Scientific Works. . . .
London: Hippolyte Bailliere, . . . 1847. [-1858.] _8vo, thirteen
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

The contents of the volumes are as follows:

I. Principles of Physics and Meteorology. By J. Muller, 1847.

II., V. Principles of the Mechanics of Machinery and Engineering. By
Julius Weisbach. 1847-1848.

III., IV., X. Chemical Technology. By F. Knapp, 1848-1851.

VI. Practical Treatise on the Use of the Microscope. By John Quekett.
Second edition. 1852.

VII. Anatomy of the External Forms of Man. By J. Fau. 1849.

VIII., XIII. Elements of Chemistry. By Thomas Graham. Second edition.
1850-1858.

IX. Architecture of the Heavens. By J. P. Nichol. Ninth edition. 1851.

XI. Manual of Practical Assaying. By John Mitchell. Second edition.
1854.

XII. Introduction to Cryptogamic Botany. By Rev. M. J. Berkeley. 1857.


SCOTT AND DAVEY.--A Guide to the Collector of Historical Documents
Literary Manuscripts and Autograph Letters etc. with an index of
valuable books of reference, where several thousand facsimiles of
handwriting may be found for the verification of mss. and autograph
letters also A New Edition of Wright's Court-Hand Restored with an
introductory chapter for the use of students and facsimiles of
watermarks by Rev. Dr. Scott & Samuel Davey . . . [with 152 plates]
London S. J. Davey . . . M DCCC XCI. _4to, half green levant morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges._


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--The Lay of the Last Minstrel a poem. By Walter
Scott, Esq. London: Printed for Longman, . . . and A. Constable and Co.
Edinburgh, By James Ballantyne, . . . 1805. _4to, red morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with a number of plates inserted.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--The Works of Walter Scott, Esq. . . . Edinburgh:
Printed by James Ballantyne and Co. for Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme,
London; and A. Constable and Co. Edinburgh. 1806. _8vo, five volumes,
green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

Volumes I-III contain "The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border," Volume
IV, "Sir Tristrem," Volume V, "The Lay of the Last Minstrel," fourth
edition. The dedication in Volume I is to Henry, Duke of Buccleuch.

Inserted is a portrait by A. Raimbach after H. Raeburn; in Volume III
three plates by A. Smith, F. Engleheart, and R. Golding after Westall;
in Volume IV an original water-colour half-title in a border, and a
drawing of Sir Tristrem's armour in a similar border; in Volume V a
plate, the engraved title from the Westall edition of 1809, and seven
other designs by C. Heath after Westall, besides nine engravings by J.
Heath after J. C. Schetky.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--Marmion; a Tale of Flodden Field. By Walter Scott,
Esq. The second edition. . . . Edinburgh: printed by J. Ballantyne and
Co. . . . 1808. _Royal 8vo, original boards, uncut edges._

Engraved title dated 1809, and six other plates after Westall, besides
three views after J. C. Schetky.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--The Lady of the Lake. A poem. By Walter Scott, Esq.
The Second edition. Edinburgh: printed for John Ballantyne and Co. . . .
1810. _Royal 8vo, original boards, uncut edges._

Large paper copy. Engraved title, dated 1811, and six other plates by
Heath, Anker Smith, Raimbach, and others after Westall.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--Life of Jonathan Swift. [1814] _4to, russia._

The original manuscript entirely in Scott's handwriting, with page
proofs corrected, and various annotations.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--Novels and Tales of the author of Waverley.
Edinburgh; printed for Archibald Constable and Co. . . . 1821. ['22]
_8vo, twelve volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Bedford._

First octavo edition, with engraved title-pages.

Illustrated by the insertion of two hundred and forty-two plates, proofs
on India paper and often in two states, including proofs before letters
and unfinished proofs. They embrace fourteen portraits of Scott, the
landscape illustrations by Turner, etc., portraits of heroines and
historical characters, and the series by Stothard, Johannot, Westall,
Corbould, Cruikshank, Faed, Allan, Cattermole, Romney, etc.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--Historical Romances of the author of Waverley.
Edinburgh; printed for Archibald Constable and Co. . . . 1822. _8vo, six
volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Engraved titles, and one hundred and seventy inserted plates, including
the designs of Westall, Johannot, Stothard, Cruikshank, Faed, Landseer,
Corbould, Leslie, etc., and many historical portraits, also six
portraits of the author. The plates are proofs, some in three states;
viz.: engraver's etching, and before and after letters on India paper.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--Quentin Durward. By the author of "Waverley, Peveril
of the Peak," &c. . . . Edinburgh: printed for Archibald Constable and
Co. . . . 1823. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, original boards, uncut
edges._

First edition.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--St Ronan's Well. By the author of "Waverley, Quentin
Durward," &c. . . . Edinburgh: printed for Archibald Constable and Co.
. . . 1824. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

First edition.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--Novels and Romances of the author of Waverley.
Edinburgh; printed for Archibald Constable and Co. 1824. _8vo, seven
volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Engraved titles and (inserted) one hundred and twenty portraits, scenes,
and views by Faed, Wilkie, Landseer, Johannot, Wright, Leslie, Fraser,
Richter, etc., and seven portraits of Sir Walter Scott. The plates are
all proofs on India paper, many in duplicate, proofs before letters.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--Tales of the Crusaders. [The Betrothed & The
Talisman]   By the author of "Waverley, Quentin Durward," &c. . . .
Edinburgh: printed for Archibald Constable and Co. . . . 1825. _Crown
8vo, four volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

First editions.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--The Poetical Works of Sir Walter Scott . . .
Edinburgh; printed for Archibald Constable and Co. . . . 1825. _8vo, ten
volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Engraved titles, and nearly one hundred inserted plates, including
twenty portraits of Scott and the illustrations by Westall, Smirke,
Stothard, Turner, Johannot, etc., for the most part proofs on India
paper, many accompanied with engraver's etching, or a proof before
letters.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--The Miscellaneous Prose Works of Sir Walter Scott . . .
Edinburgh: printed for Cadell and Co. . . . 1827. _8vo, six volumes,
half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Portrait inserted, proof on India paper.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--Tales and Romances of the author of Waverley.
Edinburgh; printed for Cadell and C^{o} . . . 1827 [-'33] _8vo, sixteen
volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Engraved titles, and one hundred and thirty inserted plates, proofs
before and after letters, some in both states, on India paper, including
sixteen portraits of Scott, and the illustrations designed by Landseer,
Frith, Mulready, Leslie, Faed, Johannot, Slous, Roberts, Cattermole,
Cruikshank, etc.

The Introductions and Notes form Volumes 15 and 16.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--The Life of Napoleon Buonaparte, Emperor of the
French. With a preliminary view of the French Revolution. By the Author
of "Waverley," &c. . . . Edinburgh: Printed by Ballantyne and Co. . . .
1827. _Crown 8vo, nine volumes, blue morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

First edition.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--Chronicles of the Canongate. Second Series. [St.
Valentine's Day, or The Fair Maid of Perth]   By the author of
"Waverley," &c. . . . Edinburgh: printed for Cadell and Co., . . . 1828.
_Crown 8vo, three volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

First edition.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--Waverley Novels. Edinburgh: Robert Cadell. . . . M
DCCC XLII. [XLVII] _Royal 8vo, twelve volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

This, the Abbotsford edition, was printed in London by Richard Clay. In
addition to the portraits and views engraved on steel, it contains many
hundred woodcut illustrations. A number of fine proof plates, coloured
and mezzotint engravings have been added.


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--Seventy-six vignettes, proofs on India paper,
illustrating the Novels and Poems of Sir Walter Scott, engraved on steel
after the designs of Tony and Alfred Johannot. _8vo, boards._


SCOTT, SIR WALTER.--See Drama.


SCOTT, WILLIAM BELL.--Poems by William Bell Scott. Ballads, Studies from
Nature, Sonnets, etc. Illustrated by seventeen etchings by the Author
and L. Alma Tadema. London Longmans, Green, and Co. 1875. _8vo, citron
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

Two of the illustrations by Alma Tadema are in duplicate, the added
plates being artist's proofs.


SCROPE, WILLIAM.--The Art of Deer-stalking; illustrated by a narrative
of a few days' sport in the Forest of Atholl, with some account of the
nature and habits of red deer, and a short description of the Scotch
forests; legends; superstitions; stories of poachers and free-booters,
&c. &c. By William Scrope, Esq., . . . Illustrated by engravings and
lithographs, after paintings by Edwin and Charles Landseer, Esqrs., and
by the author. London: John Murray, . . . M DCCC XXXVIII. _Royal 8vo,
green levant morocco, emblematic back, side fillets, emblematic corners,
gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

First edition. Engraved frontispiece-title and frontispiece, by Thomas
Landseer after Edwin Landseer, and ten lithographs.


SCROPE, WILLIAM.--Days and Nights of Salmon Fishing in the Tweed; with a
short account of the natural history and habits of the Salmon,
instructions to sportsmen, anecdotes, etc. By William Scrope, Esq. . . .
Illustrated by [13] Lithographs and [9] Wood Engravings by L. Haghe, T.
Landseer, and S. Williams, from paintings by Sir David Wilkie, Edwin
Landseer, R. A., Charles Landseer, William Simson, and Edward Cooke.
London: John Murray, . . . 1843. _Royal 8vo, green levant morocco,
emblematic back, side fillets, emblematic corners, gilt top, uncut
edges, by David._

First edition.


SCUDDER, HORACE ELISHA.--Henry Oscar Houghton A Biographical Outline by
Horace E. Scudder [8 portraits]   Cambridge   Printed at the Riverside
Press M DCCC XCVII. _12mo, half vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._


SCUDDER, HORACE ELISHA.--James Russell Lowell A Biography by Horace
Elisha Scudder . . . Cambridge Printed at the Riverside Press MCMI.
_8vo, two volumes, half vellum, uncut edges._

No. 169 of three hundred and fifty large paper copies printed: with
portrait.


SECUNDUS NICOLAIUS, JOANNES.--Kisses: a poetical translation of the
Basia of Joannes Secundus Nicolaius. [Everaerts, of the Hague] With the
original Latin, and an essay on his life and writings. The third
edition, with additions, and the Epithalamium newly translated. . . .
London, printed by D. Bond, . . . for J. Bew, . . . M DCC LXXVIII. _8vo,
citron levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back, side corners, gilt edges,
by Bedford._

Frontispiece by Bartolozzi, and over sixty inserted plates, with few
exceptions in proof state, either on India paper or before letters, by
the best French and English engravers.


SECUNDUS NICOLAIUS, JOANNES.--Kisses: a Poetical Translation of the
Basia of Joannes Secundus Nicolaius. With the original Latin, and an
Essay of his Life and Writings. The fourth edition, with additions; and
the Epithalamium newly translated . . . London, printed by John Crowder,
for J. Bew . . . 1790. _8vo, half calf, uncut edges._

Frontispiece and engraved title, with portrait, by Bartolozzi.


SECUNDUS NICOLAIUS, JOANNES.--See Propertius.


SEELEY, LEONARD BENTON, _editor_.--Mrs. Thrale Afterwards Mrs. Piozzi
a sketch of her life and passages from her diaries, Letters & other
writings edited by L. B. Seeley, . . . with nine illustrations after
Hogarth, Reynolds, Zoffany, & others   London Seeley and Co., . . .
1891. _Royal 8vo, half maroon morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 98 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed.


SEELEY, LEONARD BENTON.--See Walpole, Horace.


SEGUR, COMTE LOUIS PHILIPPE DE.--History of the Expedition to Russia,
undertaken by the Emperor Napoleon, in the year 1812. By General, Count
Philip de Segur. . . . With a map and five engravings. . . . London:
Treuttel and Wurtz, Treuttel, Jun. and Richter, . . . 1825. _8vo, two
volumes, blue morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._


SEGUR, COMTE LOUIS PHILIPPE DE.--Memoirs and Recollections of Count
Segur, Ambassador from France to the Courts of Russia and Prussia, &.
&c. written by himself. London: printed for Henry Colburn, . . . 1825.
[-1826] _8vo, two volumes, blue morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

Portrait after J. Hayter, and facsimile.


SEGUR, COMTE LOUIS PHILIPPE DE.--History of Russia and of Peter the
Great; by General Count Philip de Segur, . . . London: Treuttel and
Wuertz, Treuttel, Jun. and Richter. . . . 1829. _8vo, blue morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges._


SENEFELDER, ALOIS.--A complete Course of Lithography: containing Clear
and Explicit Instructions in all the different branches and manners of
that art: accompanied by illustrative specimens of drawings. To which is
prefixed a History of Lithography, from its origin to the present time.
By Alois Senefelder, . . . With a Preface By Frederic von
Schlichtegroll, . . . Translated from the original German, by A. S.
London: printed for R. Ackermann, . . . 1819. _4to, half red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Fourteen plates, including portrait of the author.


SENIOR, WILLIAM.--The Thames From Oxford to the Tower by William Senior
(Red Spinner) illustrated with thirty original painters'-etchings   by
Francis S. Walker, . . . London John C. Nimmo . . . M DCCC XCI. _4to,
cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 224 of two hundred and sixty large paper copies printed, with the
etchings on hand-made paper.


SENSIER, ALFRED.--Jean-Francois Millet peasant and painter   Translated
by Helena de Kay from the French of Alfred Sensier   London   Macmillan
and Co. 1881. _4to, red levant morocco, filleted back and sides, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Stikeman._

In addition to the twenty-eight illustrations issued with this volume,
twenty-five etchings have been inserted, proofs on India paper.


SEWARD, ANNA.--Monody on Major Andre. By Miss Seward. (Author of the
Elegy on Capt. Cook.) To which are added Letters addressed to her by
Major Andre, in the year 1769. Lichfield: Printed and Sold by J.
Jackson, for the Author; Sold also by Robinson, Pater-Noster-Row; Cadell
and Evans, in the Strand, London; Prince, Oxford; Merrill, Cambridge;
and Pratt and Clinch, Bath. M. DCC. LXXXI. . . . _4to, brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Washington objected to the lines in which he is called a
murderer, and Miss Seward promised him to alter them, but they were not
changed in subsequent editions.

The Letters are said to have been the creation of the author's own
imagination.


SEWARD, ANNA.--Monody on Major Andre. By Miss Seward. (Author of the
Elegy on Capt. Cook) To which are added Letters addressed to her by
Major Andre in the year 1769. The second edition. Litchfield: Printed
and sold by J. Jackson, for the Author; . . . M.DCC.LXXXI . . . _4to,
half calf, citron edges, by Bedford._


[SEYMOUR, EDWARD.]--An Abstract of the Accompt of Paym^{ts} made by the
Right Honourable Edward Seymour Esquire Trea^{r} Ma^{ts} Navy Betweene the
12^{th} of July 1673 & ye 31^{th} of Decemb^{r} 1674. _Folio, old blue
morocco, gilt back, sides covered with rich ornamentation in gold and
mosaic compartments, relieved by light sprays of flowers also in gold
and mosaic, gilt edges, by Mearne._

A manuscript of sixty-nine pages handsomely engrossed.


SHADWELL, CHARLES.--The Humours of the Army. A Comedy. As it is Acted at
the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. By Mr. Shadwel. London, Printed for
James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1713. Price 1s.
6d. _4to, half grey morocco._

First edition. A-K in fours. Dedicated to Major-General Newton.


SHADWELL, CHARLES.--Five New Plays viz. I. The Hasty Wedding: Or, The
Intriguing Squire. A Comedy. II. The Sham Prince: Or, News from Passau.
A Comedy. III. Rotherick O'Connor, King of Connaught: Or, The Distress'd
Princess. A Tragedy. IV. The Plotting Lovers: Or, The Dismal Squire. A
Farce. V. Irish Hospitality: Or, Virtue Rewarded. A Comedy. As they are
Acted at the Theatre-Royal in Dublin. Written by Mr. Charles Shadwell
. . . . London: Printed for A. Bettesworth, . . . and sold by J. Graves
. . . M DCC XX. _12mo, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Title and B-T2 in twelves.


SHAFTESBURY, ANTHONY, EARL OF.--Characteristicks of Men, Manners,
Opinions, Times . . . By the Right Honourable Anthony, Earl of
Shaftesbury. The Sixth Edition, Corrected. With the Addition of a Letter
concerning Design. [London: Tonson] M.DCC.XXXVII[-VIII] _8vo, three
volumes, contemporary red morocco, gilt back, diamond centre panels on
the sides, with a border introducing figures of birds, gilt edges._

Large paper copy. Portrait of the author after Closterman and vignettes
engraved by Gribelin.


SHAFTESBURY, ANTHONY, EARL OF.--Characteristicks of Men, Manners,
Opinions, Times. . . . By the Right Honourable Anthony, Earl of
Shaftesbury. The Fifth Edition. [vignette] Birmingham: Printed by John
Baskerville M.DCC.LXXIII. _Royal 8vo, three volumes, citron levant
morocco, gilt back and side panels after the manner of Roger Payne, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Portrait after Closterman and vignettes engraved by Gribelin.


SHAKSPEARE ILLUSTRATED, By an Assemblage of Portraits and Views,
Adapted to the whole series of that Authors Historical Dramas; to which
are added Portraits of Actors, Editors, &c. London, Published . . . by
S & E Harding, . . . 1793. _Folio, half red straight-grain morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.

Engraved title-page and one hundred and forty-eight plates by
Bartolozzi, Schiavonetti, C. Knight, T. Nugent, Birrell, and others
after Reynolds, Hollar, De Bie, Holbein, Harding, Trotter, and old
prints.


SHAKESPEARE SOCIETY.--The Papers of the Shakespeare Society: being
contributions too short in themselves for separate publication. [London]
Printed for the Shakespeare Society, . . . 1853. _8vo, four volumes in
one, cloth, uncut edges._

The sub-titles to the four volumes are dated 1844, 1845, 1847, and 1849.


SHARP, WILLIAM.--Dante Gabriel Rossetti a record and a study by William
Sharp. London Macmillan and Co. 1882. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Frontispiece by Rossetti.


SHARP, WILLIAM.--Life of Percy Bysshe Shelley by William Sharp   London
Walter Scott . . . 1887. _Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


SHARPE, CHARLES KIRKPATRICK.--Etchings by Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe
with photographs from original drawings poetical and prose fragments and
a prefatory memoir   William Blackwood and Sons   Edinburgh and London
M DCCC LX IX. _4to, gilt top, uncut edges._


SHAW, GEORGE BERNARD.--Cashel Byron's Profession. . . . By George
Bernard Shaw. 1886. The Modern Press, . . . [London] _8vo, blue morocco,
by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


SHAW, GEORGE BERNARD.--The Quintessence of Ibsenism: by G. Bernard Shaw.
London: Walter Scott . . . 1891 _Post 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._

First edition.


SHAW, GEORGE BERNARD.--The perfect Wagnerite: a commentary on the Ring
of the Niblungs. By Bernard Shaw. London: Grant Richards, . . . 1898.
_Post 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


SHAW, GEORGE BERNARD.--Plays: Pleasant and Unpleasant. By Bernard Shaw.
The First Volume, containing the three Unpleasant Plays. [The Second
Volume, containing the four Pleasant Plays.] London: Grant Richards, . . .
1898. _Post 8vo, two volumes, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition, with portrait.


SHAW, GEORGE BERNARD.--Three Plays for Puritans: The Devil's Disciple,
Caesar and Cleopatra, & Captain Brassbound's Conversion. By Bernard Shaw.
London: Grant Richards, . . . 1901. _Post 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._

First edition.


SHAW, GEORGE BERNARD.--Man and Superman. A Comedy and a Philosophy. By
Bernard Shaw. Westminster: Archibald Constable & Co., . . . 1903. _Post
8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


SHAW, GEORGE BERNARD.--The Common Sense of Municipal Trading. By Bernard
Shaw. Westminster: Archibald Constable & Co., . . . 1904. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


SHAW, HENRY.--Illuminated Ornaments selected from Manuscripts and Early
Printed Books from the Sixth to the Seventeenth Centuries. Drawn and
Engraved by Henry Shaw. F. S. A. with Descriptions by Sir Frederick
Madden, . . . London: William Pickering 1833. _Royal folio, red levant
morocco, with elaborate tooling on back and sides in the manner of
Derome, gilt edges, by Clarke & Bedford._

Large paper copy. Forty plates of miniatures, initial letters,
ornamental borders, etc., beautifully executed in gold and colours in
facsimile of the originals.


SHAW, HENRY.--Specimens of Ancient Furniture drawn from existing
authorities by Henry Shaw F. S. A. With Descriptions by Sir Samuel Rush
Meyrick, . . . London. William Pickering 1836. _Royal folio, uniform in
binding with the preceding item._

Large paper copy. Seventy-four plates printed in colour.


SHAW, HENRY.--Dresses and Decorations of the Middle Ages by Henry Shaw
. . . London, William Pickering   1843. _Imperial 8vo, two volumes, half
red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Eighty-five coloured copper-plate engravings, woodcuts, a profusion of
initial letters and examples of curious ornaments.


SHAW, HENRY.--The Decorative Arts Ecclesiastical and Civil of the Middle
Ages   By Henry Shaw . . . London William Pickering   1851. _Folio, red
levant morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt edges, by J. Wright._

One of twenty-five large paper copies printed, with forty-one plates in
gold, silver, and colours.


SHAW, HENRY.--A Handbook of the Art of Illumination, as practised during
the Middle Ages. With a description of the metals, pigments, and
processes employed by the artists at different periods. By Henry Shaw,
. . . [16 plates] London: Bell and Daldy, . . . 1866. _Folio, cloth, uncut
edges._


SHEE, MARTIN ARCHER.--The Life of Sir Martin Archer Shee, president of
the Royal Academy, F. R. S., D. C. L. By his son Martin Archer Shee, . . .
London   Longman, . . . 1860. _8vo, two volumes, blue levant morocco,
gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Illustrated by the insertion of sixty-five plates, many proofs on India
paper, and numerous examples of the artist's work, also a signed
autograph letter from Shee.


SHELLEY, HARRIET.--Harriet Shelley's Letters to Catherine Nugent.
London: Printed for Private Circulation. 1889. _Crown 8vo, original
covers, uncut edges._

Twenty-one copies printed.


SHELLEY, MARY GODWIN.--Rambles in Germany and Italy, in 1840, 1842, and
1843. By Mrs. Shelley. London: Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXLIV. _12mo, two
volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Zastrozzi, a romance. By P. B. S. . . . London:
printed by G. Wilkie and J. Robinson . . . 1810. _12mo, green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--St. Irvyne; or, the Rosicrucian: a romance. By a
Gentleman of Oxford. London: printed for J. J. Stockdale . . . 1811.
_12mo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

First edition.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--St. Irvyne; or, the Rosicrucian. A Romance. By a
Gentleman of Oxford. London: printed for J. J. Stockdale . . . 1822.
_12mo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Queen Mab; a philosophical poem: with Notes. By
Percy Bysshe Shelley . . . London: printed by P. B. Shelley, . . . 1813.
_8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition.

Privately printed on fine paper. It is said that two hundred and fifty
copies were printed, but Carlisle, the publisher, said that only one
hundred and eighty copies were issued, and that from these Shelley
himself removed the title-page and printer's name.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Queen Mab. By Percy Bysshe Shelley. London:
printed and published by W. Clark . . . 1821. _8vo, brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First published edition. Thick paper copy.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Queen Mab; a Philosophical Poem. By Percy Bysshe
Shelley. New York: printed by William Baldwin and Co . . . 1821. _18mo,
green levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges._

First American edition, edited by "A Pantheist," with the Greek, Latin,
and French passages translated. The editor deplores the fact that
Shelley's publisher was prosecuted "by an infamous junta of canting
hypocrites, assuming the title of 'A Society for the Suppression of
Vice.'"

Engraved title.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Queen Mab. By Percy Bysshe Shelley. London:
printed and published by R. Carlile . . . 1822. _8vo, green levant
morocco, gilt back, rich side border, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Alastor; or, the Spirit of Solitude: and other
poems. By Percy Bysshe Shelley. London: printed for Baldwin, Cradock,
and Joy . . . 1816. _Post 8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--History of a Six Weeks' Tour through a part of
France, Switzerland, Germany, and Holland: with Letters descriptive of a
sail round the Lake of Geneva, and of the Glaciers of Chamouni. London:
published by T. Hookham, jun. . . . and C. and J. Ollier . . . 1817.
_Post 8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First edition.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--The Revolt of Islam; a poem, in twelve cantos.
By Percy Bysshe Shelley. London: printed for C. and J. Ollier . . .
1818. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

Second issue of the first edition, largely suppressed, but republished,
with some changes, under the title "Laon and Cythna."

The first issue, consisting of a few copies only, is dated 1817.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Laon and Cythna; or, the Revolution of the
Golden City: a Vision of the Nineteenth Century. In the stanza of
Spenser. By Percy B. Shelley . . . London: printed for Sherwood, Neely,
Jones . . . and C. and J. Ollier . . . 1818. _8vo, brown levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition, with final leaf of Errata. First published as "The Revolt
of Islam."


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Rosalind and Helen, a modern eclogue; with other
poems by Percy Bysshe Shelley. London: printed for C. and J. Ollier . . .
1819. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First edition, with half-title and two final leaves of advertisement.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--The Cenci. A Tragedy, in five acts. By Percy B.
Shelley. Italy. Printed for C. and J. Ollier . . . 1819. _8vo, green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Only two hundred and fifty copies were printed for sale,
and it is the only work of Shelley's that reached a second edition
during his lifetime.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--The Cenci. 1819. _8vo, brown levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Thick paper copy of the first edition.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--The Cenci   a tragedy in five acts by Percy
Bysshe Shelley. Second edition London C and J Ollier. . . 1821. _8vo,
brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Prometheus Unbound a lyrical drama in four acts
with other poems by Percy Bysshe Shelley . . . London C. and J. Ollier
. . . 1820. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Riviere._

First edition, with the half-title.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Epipsychidion: Verses addressed to the noble and
unfortunate lady Emilia V---- now imprisoned in the Convent of ---- . . .
London C. and J. Ollier . . . MDCCCXXI. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Adonais. An Elegy on the Death of John Keats,
author of Endymion, Hyperion etc. By Percy B. Shelley . . . Pisa with
the types of Didot MDCCCXXI. _4to, original binding, enclosed in a case
of brown levant morocco, gilt back, by Riviere._

First edition, with the original blue covers enclosed.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Adonais. An Elegy on the Death of John Keats . . .
by Percy B. Shelley . . . Cambridge: printed by W. Metcalfe . . .
MDCCCXXIX. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Riviere._

First edition printed in England.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Hellas   a lyrical drama by Percy B. Shelley . . .
London   Charles and James Ollier . . . MDCCCXXII. _8vo, brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Posthumous Poems of Percy Bysshe Shelley.
London, 1824: Printed for John and Henry L. Hunt . . . _8vo, brown
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--The Masque of Anarchy. A Poem. By Percy Bysshe
Shelley. Now first published, with a preface by Leigh Hunt . . . London:
Edward Moxon . . . 1832. _Post 8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--The Shelley Papers Memoir of Percy Bysshe
Shelley by T. Medwin Esq. and Original Poems and Papers by Percy Bysshe
Shelley. Now first collected. London: Whittaker, Treacher, & Co. 1833.
_Post 8vo, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges,
by Tout._

First edition.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Essays, Letters from Abroad, Translations and
Fragments, by Percy Bysshe Shelley. Edited by Mrs. Shelley . . . London:
Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXL. _12mo, two volumes, brown levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


[SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.]--A Brief Sketch of the Life of Percy Bysshe
Shelley . . . London: J. Watson . . . [1842] _8vo, brown levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition, with the original covers enclosed.

Sharp quotes an edition of 1854 only. The sketch is taken from the
Poetical Works published in Paris, 1829, and up to 1887 the author was
not identified.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley. With an
introductory essay by Robert Browning. London: Edward Moxon . . . 1852.
_12mo, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

Printed from forgeries, and suppressed.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Select Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley edited
with an introduction by Richard Garnett. London Kegan Paul, Trench, &
Co. MDCCCLXXXII. _Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed, with frontispiece on India paper.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Letters from Percy Bysshe Shelley to Jane
Clairmont. 1889. London: Privately Printed. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Letters from Percy Bysshe Shelley to Elizabeth
Hitchener. 1890. London: Privately Printed. _8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

Printed on Whatman paper.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Letters from Percy Bysshe Shelley to William
Godwin. 1891. London: Privately Printed. _8vo, two volumes, buckram,
uncut edges._

Printed on Whatman paper.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--The Poetical Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley.
Edited by Mrs. Shelley. . . . London: Edward Moxon, . . . 1853. _Post
8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait by W. Finden.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--The Poetical Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley.
Edited by Mrs. Shelley. With a Memoir. . . . Boston: Little, Brown, and
Company. 1866. _12mo, four volumes, half cloth, uncut edges._

No. 13 of one hundred large paper copies printed, with portrait, on
India paper.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Poems from Shelley selected and arranged by
Stopford A. Brooke [vignette] London   Macmillan and Co.   1880. _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--The Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley in verse and
prose now first brought together with many pieces not before published
edited With Prefaces Notes and Appendices by Harry Buxton Forman . . .
London   printed for private distribution [Reeves & Turner] 1880. _8vo,
eight volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Fifteen portraits, views, etc., and six facsimiles.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--The Poetical Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley.
[William Morris, Kelmscott Press, 1894-'95-] _Crown 8vo, three volumes,
white pigskin, back and sides covered with a conventional floral design,
gilt over uncut edges, by The Doves Bindery._

Two hundred and fifty copies printed, with borders and woodcut
title-page.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Shelley Memorials: from authentic sources.
Edited by Lady Shelley. To which is added an Essay on Christianity, by
Percy Bysshe Shelley: now first printed. London: Smith, Elder and Co . . .
1859. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Frontispiece.


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--Relics of Shelley. Edited by Richard Garnett . . .
London: Edward Moxon & Co . . . 1862. _Post 8vo, brown levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._


SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.--See Hogg, Thomas Jefferson. Sharp, William.
Smith, George Barnett.


SHENSTONE, WILLIAM.--Poems upon Various Occasions. Written for the
Entertainment of the author, And Printed for the Amusement Of a few
friends Prejudic'd in his Favour. Oxford   Printed by Leon Lichfield . . .
1737. _12mo, blue morocco, gilt back and sides, red silk panel and
linings, gilt edges._

Written while the author was at Oxford, and subsequently suppressed by
the poet.


SHENSTONE, WILLIAM.--The Judgment of Hercules, a poem. Inscrib'd to
George Lyttelton Esq; . . . London: Printed for R. Dodsley . . . and
sold by T. Cooper . . . M. DCC. XLI. _8vo, paper wrappers, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


SHENSTONE, WILLIAM.--The School-Mistress, a poem. In imitation of
Spenser. . . . [vignette engraved by J. Mynde] London: Printed for R.
Dodsley, and Sold by T. Cooper . . . 1742. _8vo, green levant morocco,
gilt back and side panels in the manner of Roger Payne, gilt top, uncut
edges, by F. Bedford._

First edition. Half-title, one leaf (verso blank). Title, A1 (verso
blank). Advertisement, A2 (verso blank). Text, A3-A8 and B1-B2 (verso
blank), ending with a vignette. Index, B3-B4 (verso blank).


SHENSTONE, WILLIAM.--(I.-II.) The Works in verse and prose, of William
Shenstone, Esq; Most of which were never before printed. In two
volumes, with decorations. [Two lines from Virgil and vignette] Vol. I.
[II.] London: Printed for R. and J. Dodsley in Pall-mall. M DCC LX IV.
(III.) The Works, in verse and prose, of William Shenstone, Esq; Vol.
III. containing Letters to particular Friends, from the Year 1739 to
1763. London, Printed for J. Dodsley, in Pall-Mall. MDCC LXIX. _8vo,
three volumes, sprinkled calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

First edition. Bust portrait, frontispiece to Volume II, and vignettes.


SHENSTONE, WILLIAM.--The Poetical Works of William Shenstone . . .
London: printed for T. Cadell, Junior . . . 1798. _Post 8vo, two
volumes, half brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Allo._

Six copper-plate engravings, by Heath, Bromley, and Neagle after the
designs of Stothard.


SHENSTONE, WILLIAM.--Select Letters between

  the late Duchess of Somerset,
  Lady Luxborough,       Mr. Whistler,
  Miss Dolman,           Mr. R. Dodsley,

William Shenstone, Esq. and others; including a sketch of the manners,
laws, &c. of the Republic of Venice, and some poetical pieces; the whole
now first published from original copies, By Mr. [Thomas] Hull. In two
volumes. . . . London: printed for J. Dodsley, . . . M DCCLXXVIII. _8vo,
two volumes, sprinkled calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

The Preface is signed by the Editor, Thomas Hull, and dated London, Dec.
18, 1777.


SHEPHERD, RICHARD HERNE.--Tennysoniana. Notes Bibliographical and
Critical on Early Poems of Alfred & C. Tennyson. Opinions of
Contemporary Writers. In Memoriam; various Readings, with parallel
Passages in Shakespeare's Sonnets. Various Readings in Later Poems
(1842-1865). Patriotic and Minor Poems. Allusions to Scripture and to
Classic Authors. The Tennyson Portraits. Bibliographical List of
Tennyson's Volumes and of his Contributions to Periodical Publications.
Basil Montagu Pickering . . . London W. MDCCCLXVI. _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


SHEPPARD, JACK.--See Defoe, Daniel.


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--The Rivals, a Comedy. As it is Acted at the
Theatre-Royal in Covent-Garden. London: Printed for John Wilkie . . .
MDCCLXXV. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, by
Bradstreet's._

First edition. A1-A4, a1-a4, and O1-O2 in fours.


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--Verses To the Memory of Garrick. Spoken as
A Monody, at The Theatre Royal in Drury-Lane. London: Published by T.
Evans, . . . J. Wilkie, . . . E. and C. Dilly, . . . A. Portal, . . .
and J. Almon, . . . M.DCC.LXXIX. _4to, red morocco, gilt edges, by
Smith-Mansell._

Frontispiece engraved by Albanesi after Loutherbourg.


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--The School for Scandal. A Comedy. [Six
lines of verse from Dryden] Dublin: Printed for J. Ewling, [1778?]
_4to, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, by Bradstreet's._

Presumably the first edition. The play was first performed May 8, 1777.

Collation: Title, A1 (verso blank). "Dramatis Personae," A2 (verso
blank). Prologue by Garrick, A3. Text, A4-N2 recto in fours. Pages 1-93.
Epilogue by "Coleman," N2 verso-N3 (verso Errata).


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--The School for Scandal, a comedy; as it is
performed at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. Dublin: printed in the
year M DCC LXXXI. _12mo, brown levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back,
side corners and centre ornaments, gilt edges, by L. Broga._

Presumably the second edition.

A-I in fours, ending with Prologue by Garrick and Epilogue by Colman.
Title on A1 (verso "Dramatis Personae").


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--The Critic or A Tragedy Rehearsed   A
Dramatic Piece in three Acts as it is performed at the Theatre Royal in
Drury Lane By Richard Brinsley Sheridan Esq^{r}. London. Printed for T.
Becket, . . . MDCCLXXXI. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Engraved title-page, A1-A3 and B1-H1, in eights. Pages 1-98. There is
another edition of 1781 with half-title and 96 pages. This edition is
usually called the first, but there is a copy of the play dated 1780 in
the British Museum.


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--The Critic. 1781. _8vo, old red morocco,
gilt back, side borders, centre ornaments, gilt edges._

Another copy, with the final page of advertisements.

A presentation copy from the author to Lord Spencer, whose bookplate is
in the volume.


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--The Critic: or, a Tragedy Rehearsed. A
dramatic piece of three acts. As performed at the Theatre-Royal in
Drury-Lane. By Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Esq. Dublin: Printed for
Messrs. Sheppard, Wilkinson &c . . . M DCC LXXXV. _12mo, silk, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery. Bound with SHERIDAN'S "Trip to Scarborough,"
1781._

First Irish edition. Dedication to Mrs. Greville, Prologue by Richard
Fitzpatrick. A2-C12 in twelves, title on A2.


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--A Trip to Scarborough. A comedy. As
performed at the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane. Altered from Vanbrugh's
Relapse; or, Virtue in Danger. By Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Esq.
London. Printed for G. Wilkie, . . . M DCC LXXXI. _8vo, calf, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Presumably the first edition. Produced in February, 1777. The British
Museum has no edition of this play earlier than 1786.

Collation: Half-title, A1 (verso blank). Title, A2 (verso blank).
Prologue by Garrick, A3. "Dramatis Personae," A4 (recto blank). Text,
B1-O4, in fours. Pages 1-104; 24, 30, 78, 80, and 96 not numbered.


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--A Trip to Scarborough, a comedy. As
performed at the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane. Altered from Vanbrugh's
Relapse; or, Virtue in Danger. By Richard Brinsley Sheridan, . . .
Dublin: printed by R. Marchbank, for the Company of Booksellers. M.
DCC.LXXXI. _12mo, silk, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery. Bound with
SHERIDAN'S "Critic," 1785._

A-C in twelves, title on A1.


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--The Duenna: a comic opera. In three acts.
As performed at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden: with universal
applause. By R. B. Sheridan, Esq   London. Printed for T. N. Longman, . . .
1794. _8vo, red morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First authorized edition, although the first printed edition was in
1785. The play was acted at Covent Garden, 1775. Title, Dramatis
Personae, and B-K in fours, K4 blank.


[SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.]--The Camp, a musical entertainment, as
performed at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. By R. B. Sheridan, Esq.
London: printed in the year M, DCC, XCV. _12mo, olive morocco,
Janseniste, uncut edges, with the original blue covers bound in, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition. A1-A6 and B1-B8.

_Biographia Dramatica_ says in regard to this play: "Mr. Tate Wilkinson,
in his 'Wandering Patentee,' vol. iv, p. 124, positively denies that Mr.
Sheridan ever wrote a line of it."


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--Pizarro; a tragedy, in five acts; as
performed at the Theatre Royal in Drury-Lane: taken from the German
drama of Kotzebue; and adapted to the English stage by Richard Brinsley
Sheridan. London: printed for James Ridgway, . . . 1799. Price 2s. 6d. A
superior Edition, on fine wove Paper, hot-hressed [sic], Price 5s.
_8vo, cloth._

First edition. A-L in fours. The dedication to Sheridan's wife is as
follows: "To Her, whose approbation of this Drama, and whose
peculiar delight in the applause it has received from the Public, have
been to _me_ the highest gratification its success has produced--I
dedicate this Play." The Epilogue was written by William Lamb.

The play is said to have passed through twenty-nine editions of one
thousand copies each.


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--The Works of the late Right Honourable
Richard Brinsley Sheridan. . . . London: John Murray, . . . James
Ridgway; and Thomas Wilkie. 1821. _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Edited by Thomas Moore, whose Advertisement is dated "Champs Elysees,
Paris, November, 1820."


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--Works. 1821. _8vo, two volumes, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Another copy on fine paper, with four portraits and nine other scenic
and character plates, some proofs, inserted.


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--The Dramatic Works of Richard Brinsley
Sheridan. With a biographical and critical sketch by Leigh Hunt. London:
Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXLVI. _Royal 8vo, calf, gilt back, by W.
Matthews._


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--The Dramatic Works of Richard Brinsley
Sheridan with an Introduction by Richard Grant White. New York: Dodd,
Mead, and Company 1883. _8vo, three volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt
back and side panels, gilt over uncut edges, by Marius Michel._

No. 7 of thirty copies printed on Japan paper. Three portraits of
Sheridan, each in two states, proofs before and after letters.


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--Dramatic Works. 1883. _8vo, three volumes,
green levant morocco, gilt back, Derome border on the sides, doubled
with red morocco, inside border, silk lining, gilt edges, by David._

One of two copies printed on vellum.


SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY.--See Propertius. Smith, Sydney.


SHERIDANIANA; or, Anecdotes of the Life of Richard Brinsley Sheridan;
his Table-Talk, and Bon Mots. London: Henry Colburn . . . 1826. _12mo,
red levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Tribullier._

Portrait by Newton after Reynolds.


SHERLOCK, WILLIAM.--The Scripture Proofs of our Saviour's Divinity
Explained and Vindicated: with an Examination of a late Discourse
Concerning the Descent of the Man Jesus Christ from Heaven, together
with his Ascension to Heaven again. By W. Sherlock, D. D. Dean of St.
Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Her Majesty. London: Printed for W.
Rogers, . . . 1706. _8vo, old red morocco, panelled sides, delicately
tooled, with the monogram and crown of Queen Anne in each corner, gilt
edges._

Queen Anne's copy.


SHIPPEN, WILLIAM.--See Defoe, Daniel. Moderation Displayed.


SHIRLEY, EVELYN PHILIP.--Lower Eatington: its manor house and church.
London: privately printed at the Chiswick Press, by Whittingham and
Wilkins. 1869. _4to, brown levant morocco, doubled with maroon russia,
russia guards, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Five woodcuts.


SHIRLEY, THOMAS.--The Angler's Museum; or, the whole art of float and
fly Fishing. Containing,

   I. The Nature and Properties of Fish in general

   II. Rules and Cautions to be observed by young Anglers.

   III. The Choice and Preparation of Rods and Lines.

   IV. Of Float-fishing, and of live and dead Baits.

   V. Of Fly-fishing, and the Preparation of artificial Flies.

   VI. An Account of the different Sorts of Fish, their Haunts
   and spawning Times, and Seasons to angle for them.

   VII. An Account of some of the principal Sea Fish, their
   Nature, Qualities, and the Manner of catching them, &c.

   VIII. Particulars respecting the Laws and Customs of Angling.

The Whole carefully collected from actual Experience, by Thomas Shirley.
London: Printed for John Fielding . . . [1784] _12mo, green morocco,
gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Hering._

Portrait of John Kirby, the celebrated fisherman.


SHIRREFS, ANDREW.--Poems, chiefly in the Scottish Dialect, by Andrew
Shirrefs, A.M. . . . Edinburgh: printed for the author, by D. Willison:
. . . M, DCC, XC. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Portrait by J. Beugo after Caldwell. On the half-title is
the inscription, "Presented by the Author to William Smith, Aberdeen,
10^{th} March 1791."


SHORE, JANE.--Jane Shore to the Duke of Gloster, an Epistle. . . .
London: Printed for R. Dodsley . . . and Sold by M. Cooper . . . M. DCC.
XLIX. _4to, paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._

Contains the half-title.


SHORT, FRANK.--On the Making of Etchings. By Frank Short, [cut of
Rembrandt] London. Robert Dunthorne. . . . 1888. _4to, vellum boards,
gilt edges._

No. 112 of one hundred and fifty copies printed on Japanese vellum. Four
plates and illustrations in the margin.


SHORTHOUSE, J. HENRY.--John Inglesant. A Romance. London. Macmillan and
Co . . . 1881. _8vo, two volumes, half olive levant morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._

First edition.


SIGOURNEY, LYDIA HUNTLEY.--Scenes in my Native Land. By Mrs. L. H.
Sigourney. . . . Boston: James Munroe and Company. M DCCC XLV. _16mo,
original cloth, gilt edges._

First edition. Frontispiece and title engraved by D. Glover, the former
after W. H. Bartlett.


SILLAR, DAVID.--Poems, by David Sillar. [Seven lines from Ramsay]
Kilmarnock: printed by John Wilson. M, DCC, LXXXIX. _8vo, green
straight-grain morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition. Dedicated to Hugh Montgomery of Skelmorlie.


SILLIMAN, BENJAMIN.--Remarks made on a short tour between Hartford and
Quebec in the autumn of 1819: by the author of a journal of travels in
England, Holland, and Scotland. New Haven: printed and published by S.
Converse. 1820. _12mo, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Engraved title and nine plates.


SILLIMAN, BENJAMIN.--A Tour to Quebec, in the autumn of 1819. By Dr.
Benjamin Silliman . . . London: printed for Sir Richard Phillips and Co
. . . 1822. _8vo, half red morocco, uncut edges._

Second edition, with four illustrations, on two plates, by Read after
Wadsworth.


SIMCOE, JOHN GRAVES.--A Journal of the Operations of The Queen's
Rangers, From the End of the Year 1777, to the conclusion of the late
American War. By Lieutenant-Colonel Simcoe, Commander of that Corps.
Exeter: printed for the author. [1787] _4to, original boards, entirely
uncut, in a red morocco case._

Printed on thick paper, with ten folded plates of Plans.


SIMMS, WILLIAM GILMORE.--Atalantis; a story of the sea . . . [and The
Eye and the Wing] Philadelphia: Carey and Hart. 1848. _12mo, half green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._


SIMROCK, KARL, ETC.--Karl Simrock, on the Plots of Shakespeare. And
Shakespeare's Henry IV. from a contemporary MS. Both edited By J. O.
Halliwell. [London] Printed for the Shakespeare Society, . . . 1853.
_8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

The two sub-titles are dated 1850 and 1845.


SINCLAIR, ALEXANDER.--Fifty Years of Newspaper Life, 1845-1895: being
chiefly Reminiscences of that Time. By Alexander Sinclair, Of the
"Glasgow Herald." Printed for private circulation, [n. d.] _4to, blue
morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges._

Frontispiece and woodcuts in the text.

Presentation copy from the author.


SINGER, SAMUEL WELLER.--Researches into the History of Playing Cards;
with illustrations of the Origin of Printing and Engraving on Wood. By
Samuel Weller Singer. London: printed by T. Bensley and Son for Robert
Triphook . . . 1816. _4to, red levant morocco, back and sides richly
tooled, gilt top, uncut edges, by David._

Two hundred and fifty copies printed. Nineteen plates, eight coloured
and six on India paper, also many woodcut illustrations.


SINGER AND STRANG.--Etching, Engraving and the other methods of Printing
Pictures by Hans W. Singer & William Strang   With ten original plates
by, and four illustrations after, William Strang   London   Kegan Paul,
Trench, Truebner & Co. . . . 1897. _4to, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 23 of fifty large paper copies printed.


SKEEN, WILLIAM.--Early Typography. By William Skeen. Colombo: Ceylon.
1872. _8vo, half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


SKELTON, SIR JOHN.--Charles I. by Sir John Skelton, . . . Goupil & Co.,
. . . London and Paris . . . 1898. _Royal 4to, red levant morocco, gilt
back, side corners, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

No. 80 of five hundred copies printed on Japan paper, with a duplicate
set of the large plates. Coloured frontispiece, twenty-three plates, and
eighteen vignettes.


SKETCHLEY, W.--The Cocker; containing Every Information to the Breeders
and Amateurs of that noble bird, The Game Cock: to which is added, a
variety of other useful information for The Instruction of those who
are attendants on the Cock Pit. By W. Sketchley . . . Burton-on-Trent:
Printed and Published by J. Croft . . . 1814. _rep. 8vo, boards, uncut
edges._

Frontispiece.


SLATER, J. HERBERT.--Engravings and their value. A guide for the print
collector. By J. Herbert Slater, . . . London: L. Upcott Gill, . . .
1891. _Crown 8vo, cloth._

First edition.


SLATER, J. HERBERT.--Engravings and their Value: a guide for the print
collector   by J. Herbert Slater . . . Second edition. Revised and
enlarged   London L. Upcott Gill, . . . 1897. _Post 8vo, cloth._


"SLICK, SAMUEL."--See Haliburton, Thomas Chandler.


SLOANE, SIR HANS.--Histoire de la Jamaique, Traduite de l'Anglois [de
Sir Hans Sloane] Par M.* * *, [Raulin] ancien Officier de Dragons. A
Londres, Chez Nourse. M. DCC. LI. _12mo, two volumes, original green
morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by Derome._

Six folded plates, engraved by Poilly.


SMEDLEY, FRANCIS EDWARD.--Lewis Arundel; or, the Railroad of Life. By
Frank E. Smedley, . . . With [42] illustrations by "Phiz" [Hablot K.
Browne] London: Virtue, Hall, & Virtue, . . . 1852. _8vo, half red
levant morocco, gilt back, figured silk sides, gilt top, uncut edges,
with the original covers bound in, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


SMILES, SAMUEL.--The Huguenots their settlements, churches, & industries
in England and Ireland   By Samuel Smiles . . . London   John Murray, . . .
1867. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


SMITH, ADAM.--An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations. By Adam Smith, LL. D. and F. R. S. Formerly Professor of
Moral Philosophy in the University of Glasgow. . . . London: printed
for W. Strahan; and T. Cadell, . . . M DCC LXXVI. _4to, two volumes,
dark blue levant morocco, blind tooled back and sides, gilt edges, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition.


SMITH, ADAM.--An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations. By Adam Smith, LL.D. With a life of the author, an introductory
discourse, notes, and supplemental dissertations. By J. R. M^{c}Culloch,
. . . Edinburgh: printed for Adam Black, and William Tait; . . . M. DCCC.
XXVIII. _8vo, four volumes, half green vellum, uncut edges._

Portrait by J. Horsburgh from the medallion by Tassia, with proof on
India paper.


SMITH, ALBERT.--The Wassail-Bowl. By Albert Smith . . . London: Richard
Bentley, . . . 1843. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition, with the original covers bound in. Steel frontispieces,
and numerous woodcut illustrations designed by Leech.


SMITH, ALBERT.--The Natural History of The Gent, [vignette] By Albert
Smith. London: David Bogue, . . . MDCCCXLVII. _16mo, half red morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition, with forty-five woodcut illustrations, and the original
covers.


SMITH, ALBERT.--The Natural History of the Gent, [vignette] By Albert
Smith. London: David Bogue, . . . MDCCCXLVII. _16mo, half green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original front cover
bound in._

Thirty-eight woodcuts, including frontispiece. The front cover reads
"Third edition."


SMITH, ALBERT.--A Bowl of Punch. By Albert Smith. Illustrated by
Henning, Hine, and Sala. London: D. Bogue, . . . MDCCCXLVIII. _16mo,
half red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition, with the original covers and one hundred and fifty-two
woodcuts.


SMITH, ALBERT.--The Natural History of the Idler upon Town, [vignette]
By Albert Smith. Illustrated by A. Henning. [53 woodcuts] London: D.
Bogue, . . . M DCCC XLVIII. _16mo, half green levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, with the original front cover bound in, also that
of "The Natural History of the Flirt."_


SMITH, ALBERT.--A Month at Constantinople by Albert Smith. London: David
Bogue, . . . MDCCCL. _Crown 8vo, half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with a coloured frontispiece and numerous woodcut
illustrations.


SMITH, ALBERT.--The Story of Mont Blanc. By Albert Smith, [vignette]
London: David Bogue, . . . MDCCC LIII. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Coloured frontispiece and numerous woodcuts.


SMITH, EDMUND.--Phaedra and Hippolitus. A Tragedy. As it is Acted at the
Queen's Theatre in the Hay-Market, By Her Majesty's Sworn Servants. By
Mr. Edmund Smith. London, Printed for Bernard Lintott, . . . [1709]
_4to, rose levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by
Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. Dedicated to Lord Halifax.


SMITH, GEORGE BARNETT.--Shelley a critical biography by George Barnett
Smith . . . Edinburgh David Douglas 1877. _Post 8vo, cloth, gilt top,
uncut edges._


SMITH, HORACE AND JAMES, AND OTHERS.--The Tin Trumpet; or Heads and
Tales, for the wise and waggish; to which are added Poetical
Selections. By the late Paul Chatfield, M. D. Edited by Jefferson
Saunders, Esq. . . . London: Printed for Whittaker & Co. . . . 1836.
_Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Paul Chatfield, M. D., engraved by Adlard.


SMITH, JAMES AND HORACE.--Rejected Addresses: or, the New Theatrum
Poetarum. By James Smith & Horace Smith. . . . Twenty-second edition,
with additional notes. London: John Murray, . . . 1851. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait by E. Finden after Harlowe.


SMITH, JEROME V. C.--Natural History of the Fishes of Massachusetts,
embracing a Practical Essay on Angling. By Jerome V. C. Smith, M. D.
[woodcut] Boston: Allen and Ticknor 1833. _16mo, half green levant
morocco, gilt back and top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Fifty cuts of fish.


SMITH, JOHN CHALONER.--British Mezzotint Portraits; being a descriptive
catalogue of these engravings from the Introduction of the Art to the
early part of the present Century. Arranged according to the engravers;
the inscriptions given at full length; and the variations of state
precisely set forth; accompanied by Biographical Notes, And Appendix of
a Selection of the Prices produced at Public Sales by Some of the
Specimens, down to the present time. By John Chaloner Smith, . . .
London: Henry Sotheran & Co., . . . 1878. . . . [-1883] _Royal 8vo, four
parts in five volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Four frontispieces.


SMITH, JOHN CHRISTOPHER.--See Handel and Smith.


SMITH, JOHN THOMAS.--Nollekens and his times: comprehending a life of
that celebrated sculptor; and memoirs of several contemporary artists,
from the time of Roubiliac, Hogarth, and Reynolds, to that of Fuseli,
Flaxman, and Blake. By John Thomas Smith, . . . London: Henry Colburn,
. . . 1828. _8vo, two volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

Portrait of Nollekens, by Bond after Jackson.


SMITH, JOHN THOMAS.--An Antiquarian Ramble in the Streets of London,
with anecdotes of their more celebrated residents. By John Thomas Smith
. . . edited by Charles Mackay. London: Richard Bentley . . . 1846.
_8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


SMITH, SEBA.--The Life and Writings of Major Jack Downing, of
Downingville, away down east in the state of Maine. Boston: Lilly, Wait,
Colman, & Holden. 1834. _18mo, boards._


SMITH, SYDNEY.--Sermons preached at St. Paul's Cathedral, the Foundling
Hospital, and Several Churches in London; together with others addressed
to a country congregation. By the late Rev. Sydney Smith . . . London:
printed for Longman . . . 1846. _8vo, calf, gilt._


SMITH, SYDNEY.--The Works of the Rev. Sydney Smith. Fourth edition.
London: printed for Longman . . . 1848. _8vo, three volumes, calf,
gilt._

Portrait engraved by T. A. Dean.


SMITH, SYDNEY.--Elementary Sketches of Moral Philosophy, delivered at
the Royal Institution, in the years 1804, 1805, and 1806, by the late
Rev. Sydney Smith . . . London: 1849. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 23 of one hundred copies printed for private distribution.


SMITH AND SHERIDAN.--Bon-Mots of Sydney Smith and R. Brinsley Sheridan
edited by Walter Jerrold with grotesques by Aubrey Beardsley   London:
Published by J. M. Dent and Company . . . M DCCC XCIV. _16mo, cloth,
gilt top, uncut edges._


SMITH, WILLIAM.--The History Of the Province of New-York, from the
First Discovery to the Year M.DCC.XXXII. To which is annexed, A
Description of the Country, with a short Account of the Inhabitants,
their Trade, Religious and Political State, and the Constitution of
the Courts of Justice in that Colony . . . By William Smith, A.M.
London: Printed for Thomas Wilcox, . . . M.DCC.LVII. _4to, blue levant
morocco, gilt back and sides, doubled with blue morocco, gilt edges, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition: with map, "The South View of Oswego on Lake Ontario,"
engraved by J. Mynde.


SMITH, WILLIAM.--The History Of the Province of New-York. 1757. _4to,
red levant morocco, gilt back, centre ornaments on the sides, uncut
edges, by Pratt._

Another copy, printed upon large paper and measuring 12 by 9-3/8 inches.


SMITH, WILLIAM.--A Catalogue of the Works of Cornelius Visscher. By
William Smith, . . . Reprinted from the Fine Arts Quarterly Review, for
private circulation only, by John Childs and Son, Bungay. 1864.
_Imperial 8vo, cloth._

Presentation copy from the author, with a notice of Visscher by the same
author, pages 199-208, inserted.


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The Adventures of Roderick Random. London: Printed
for J. Osborn . . . MDCCXLVIII. _12mo, two volumes, red levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with frontispieces by C. Grignion after F. Hayman.


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The Adventures of Roderick Random. By T. Smollett, M.
D. With [5] illustrations by George Cruikshank. . . . London: James
Cochrane and Co., . . . 1831. _Post 8vo, half maroon levant morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges, by V. Krafft._


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The Regicide: or, James the First, of Scotland. A
Tragedy. By the Author of Roderick Random. . . . London: Printed by
Subscription, for the Benefit of the Author, M DCC XLIX. (Price Five
Shillings.) _8vo, Spanish calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First edition.


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The Adventures of Peregrine Pickle. In which are
included, Memoirs of a Lady of Quality. . . . London: Printed for the
Author: . . . MDCCLI. _12mo, four volumes, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The Adventures of Peregrine Pickle: in which are
included Memoirs of a Lady of Quality. . . . London: Printed for J.
Walker and Co.; . . . By S. Hamilton, Weybridge, Surrey. 1815. _24mo,
two volumes, citron straight-grain morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt
edges, by Hering._

Engraved frontispieces and titles by C. Warren after T. Uwins.


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The Adventures of Peregrine Pickle. In which are
included Memoirs of a Lady of Quality. By T. Smollett, M. D. with [8]
illustrations by George Cruikshank. . . . London: James Cochrane and
Co., . . . 1831. _Post 8vo, two volumes, half maroon levant morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges, by V. Krafft._


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The Adventures of Ferdinand Count Fathom. By the
Author of Roderick Random. London: Printed for T. Johnson . . .
M,DCC,LIII. _12mo, two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The History and Adventures of an Atom. London:
Printed for Robinson and Roberts . . . MDCCXLIX [MDCCLXIX.] _12mo, two
volumes, Spanish calf, gilt back, citron edges, by Jenkins & Cecil._

First edition. A Key to this semi-political work will be found in "A
Second Journey round the Library of a Bibliomaniac," by William Davis.


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The Expedition of Humphrey Clinker. By the Author of
Roderick Random. London, Printed for W. Johnston . . . and B. Collins
MDC[C]LXXI. _12mo, three volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Only the first volume has the error in the date of
publication, which was corrected after a few copies had left the press.


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The Expedition of Humphrey Clinker. By T. Smollett,
M. D. With a Memoir of the Author by Thomas Roscoe, Esq. and
illustrations by George Cruikshank. . . . London: printed for Cochrane
and Pickersgill, . . . 1831. _Post 8vo, half maroon levant morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges, by V. Krafft._

Portrait by Freeman, and four other plates.


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--Plays and Poems written by T. Smollett, M. D. with
Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the Author. London: printed for T.
Evans . . . and R. Baldwin . . . MDCCLXXVII. _Post 8vo, original boards,
uncut edges._

First edition. Vignette portrait on the title-page, by S. Ravenet after
Sir Joshua Reynolds.

The arrangement of preliminary leaves in this volume is so unusual as to
give the impression on a first examination that c1 is missing. But as
the copy in the Advocates' Library, Edinburgh, is similar to this,
except for the transposition of the half-title of "The Regicide," which
there precedes the Preface instead of the play itself, as in the present
copy, the supposition is that no leaves are lacking.

As the present copy is in the original boards, the arrangement of
signatures is easily discernible. For the preliminary leaves it is as
follows: Half-title and title, one unnumbered sheet; a, eight leaves; b,
eight leaves; c, six leaves, the first four lettered c2, c3, c4, and 2
(according to the actual folding of the sheet, there is no c1, the first
page being misprinted c2); two leaves, with no signatures, pasted
together, viz.: the end of the Preface (verso "Persons of the Drama")
and the half-title of "The Regicide" (verso blank); B, six leaves, the
first three lettered B2, B3, and B4; one leaf pasted to B and numbered
4. Signatures C-S are in eights.

The pagination of the preliminary leaves is as follows: Half-title and
title unnumbered, i-xxix (viii misprinted iii), four unnumbered pages,
and xxxvi-xlvii, the verso of which is unnumbered. The omitted numbers
between xxix and xxxvi indicate a missing leaf, but even though the
half-title of "The Regicide" were to fill the place, as in the copy in
the Advocates' Library, making the Preface to the whole book follow the
half-title of one of the works, which is an unnatural arrangement, there
would still be a missing leaf, as the first page of text of "The
Regicide" is numbered 3.

The simplest explanation of the discrepancy is to suppose a printer's
error in the pagination of the preliminary matter; i.e., xxxvi should be
xxxiv.

There is no copy of this edition in the British Museum or the Bodleian
Library, nor in the University or Trinity College Libraries, Cambridge,
and the copy in the Advocates' Library, Edinburgh, bound in full calf,
lacks the preliminary half-title.

With this record of signatures, the following collation gives the
lettering of the leaves as actually printed.

Collation: Half-title, one leaf (verso blank). Title with portrait, one
leaf (verso blank). Life, a1-a8 and b1-b7 (verso blank). Contents, b8.
Preface, c2-c8 (verso "Persons of the Drama"). Half-title of "The
Regicide," one leaf, which might be counted as c8, to complete the
signature c, or as B1, to precede B2. "The Regicide," B2-I5, in eights.
Half-title of "The Reprisal," I6 (verso "Persons represented").
Prologue, I7. Text, I8-O5 (verso blank), ending with the Epilogue.
Half-title, "Advice, and Reproof: two Satires. First published in the
Year 1746 and 1747," O6 (verso blank). "Advice," O7-P6. Half-title of
"Reproof," P7 (verso blank). Text, P8-Q6. "The Tears of Scotland," 1746,
Q7-Q8. Poems, R1-R4 recto. Odes, R4 verso-S5 recto. "Observations On
Dr. Smollett's Ode to Independence," S5 verso-S8. Pages 1-272.


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The Works of Tobias Smollett, M. D. with Memoirs of
his Life; to which is prefixed a View of the Commencement and Progress
of Romance, by John Moore, M. D. London: Printed for B. Law &c . . .
1797. _8vo, eight volumes, sprinkled calf, gilt back, citron edges, by
Bedford._

Portrait of Smollett by Holloway, and plate of his monument.


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The Miscellaneous Works of Tobias Smollett; to which
is prefixed, memoirs of his life and writings. . . . Embellished with
twenty-six engravings, By Rowlandson & Others, . . . Edinburgh: printed
for C. Elliot, By J. Orphoot, . . . 1809. _8vo, five volumes, half brown
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--The History of England by T. Smollett . . . [William
and Mary to death of George II] Oxford, published by D. A. Talboys; and
William Pickering, London. MDCCCXXVII. _Royal 8vo, five volumes, red
levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt over uncut edges._

One of fifty copies printed on large paper, with five portraits of the
sovereigns by Worthington, proofs on India paper.


SMOLLETT, TOBIAS.--See Cervantes, Saavedra, Miguel de. Le Sage, Alain
Rene.


SNOW, ROBERT.--(I.) Observations on Imitation. By Robert Snow, . . .
London: William Pickering. 1847. (II) Vert-Vert from the French of
Gresset by Robert Snow . . . London   William Pickering   1850. _Post
8vo, two works in one volume, half cloth, uncut edges._


SOMERVILLE, WILLIAM.--The Chace. A Poem. By William Somervile, Esq;
[One line from Virgil and two from Horace] London, Printed for G.
Hawkins, and sold by T. Cooper at the Globe in Pater-Noster-Row. M
DCC XXXV. _4to, blue levant morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt top,
uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


SOMERVILLE, WILLIAM.--The Chace. A Poem. By William Somerville, Esq; . . .
London, Printed for G. Hawkins, and sold by T. Cooper . . . MDCCXXXV.
_8vo, green morocco, gilt back, side border, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Alfred Matthews._

Second edition.


SOMERVILLE, WILLIAM.--The Chase. A Poem. By William Somervile, Esq.
London: printed by W. Bulmer and Co. Shakespeare Printing Office . . .
1796. _4to, green morocco, gilt back and sides, silk linings, gilt
edges, by Staggemeier._

One of three copies printed on vellum, with thirteen woodcuts by T.
Bewick, drawn on the blocks by J. Bewick.


SOMERVILLE, WILLIAM.--The Chase. 1796. _4to, green levant morocco, gilt
back and side panels in emblematic design, gilt top, uncut edges, by
David._

Another copy, extra-illustrated by the insertion of one hundred and
twenty-five engravings, including a proof set of the Bewick cuts,
portraits of the author, etc., and the Stothard, Sharpe, and other
selected plates, some in two or more states, and the majority on India
paper.


SOMERVILLE, WILLIAM.--Hobbinol, or the Rural Games, a burlesque poem, In
Blank Verse. By William Somervile Esq; [Five lines from Virgil]
London: Printed for J. Stagg, . . . MDCCXL. _4to, Spanish calf, gilt
back, side borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Dedicated to Hogarth.


SONG OF SOLOMON.--The Song of Solomon. With twelve full page plates: and
various other decorations. By H. Granville Fell   London: Guild of
Women Binders. . . . [1897] _4to white buckram, uncut edges._

One of twelve copies with duplicate plates on thick vellum, coloured by
Miss Gloria Cardew for the Guild of Women Binders.


SONG OF SOLOMON.--The Song of Songs which is Solomon's. [Colophon] . . .
Printed by me, St. John Hornby, at the Ashendene Press, Shelley House,
Chelsea. Illuminated by Florence Kingsford. The year of the Coronation
of King Edward VII. mdccccij. _16mo, blue levant morocco, uncut edges,
by F. P._

Printed upon vellum. Illuminated title-page, border, etc.


SONGS.--A Collection of English Songs, with An Appendix of Original
Pieces . . . London, 1796: printed by William Bennett . . . Collected by
Alexander Dalrymple. _8vo, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges._


SONGS AND CAROLS.--Songs and Carols. Printed from a Manuscript in the
Sloane Collection in the British Museum   London: William Pickering:
MDCCCXXXVI. _16mo, cloth, uncut edges._


SONGS AND BALLADS.--A Little Book of Songs and Ballads, gathered from
Ancient Musick Books, MS. and Printed. By E. F. Rimbault . . . London:
Printed for John Russell Smith . . . M.DCCC.LI. _18mo, half green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._


SONGS AND BALLADS, MERRY.--See Farmer, John S.


SONGS OF SCOTLAND.--See Cunningham, Allan.


SONGSTER.--The London Songster, or Polite Musical Companion,
containing Four Hundred and Fifty-four of the newest and most
favourite Songs, Catches, Duets, and Cantatas, now in Vogue at the
public Theatres and Gardens. To which is added, A genteel Collection of
the various Toasts, Sentiments, and Hob Nobs, now in Fashion. [Two
lines from Congreve] London, Printed for W. Nicoll, . . . MDCCLXVII.
[Price Two Shillings.] _12mo, red levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt
edges, by Cecil & Larkin._


SONNETS.--Specimens of English Sonnets Selected by the Rev. Alexander
Dyce   London   William Pickering 1833. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


SONNETS of Three Centuries: a selection including many examples hitherto
unpublished. Edited by T. Hall Caine. London: Elliot Stock, . . . 1882.
_4to, cloth, uncut edges._


SONNETS.--Three Hundred English Sonnets chosen and edited with a few
notes by David M. Main . . . William Blackwood and Sons Edinburgh . . .
MDCCCLXXXIV. _8vo, original covers, uncut edges._

No. 10 of one hundred large paper copies printed.


SOPHIA DOROTHEA.--Memoirs of Sophia Dorothea, Consort of George I.
chiefly from the secret archives of Hanover, Brunswick, Berlin, and
Vienna; including a Diary of the Conversations of illustrious personages
of those courts, illustrative of her history, with letters and other
documents. Now first published from the Originals. . . . London: Henry
Colburn, . . . 1845. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Two portraits.


SOTHEBY, SAMUEL LEIGH.--Principia Typographica. The Block-Books, or
Xylographic Delineations of Scripture History, issued in Holland,
Flanders, and Germany, during the fifteenth century, Exemplified and
Considered with the origin of Printing. To which is added an attempt to
elucidate the character of the Paper-Marks of the period. A work
contemplated by the late Samuel Sotheby, and carried out by his son,
Samuel Leigh Sotheby. . . . London: Printed for the Author . . .
M.DCCC.LVIII. _Folio, three volumes, half morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges._

Two hundred and fifty copies privately printed, with one hundred and
twenty plates, some coloured, and more than two hundred woodcuts.


SOUTHEY, ROBERT.--(I.) Poems, by Robert Southey. Printed by N. Biggs,
for Joseph Cottle, Bristol, and G. G. and J. Robinson, London. 1797.
(II.) Poems, by Robert Southey. [Line from Spenser] The second volume.
Bristol: printed by Biggs and Cottle, for T. N. Longman and O. Rees . . .
London. 1799. _Post 8vo, two volumes, red morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First editions.


SOUTHEY, ROBERT, _editor_.--The Annual Anthology. Volume I. 1799.
[Volume II. 1800.] Bristol: printed by Biggs and Co. for T. N. Longman
and O. Rees, . . . London. _Foolscap 8vo, two volumes, original boards,
uncut edges._

Southey states in the Advertisement to Volume I his intention to publish
annually a similar volume, and, after the Contents of Volume II, that
communications for the third volume are to be addressed to Messrs. Biggs
& Co., Printers, Bristol. But a third volume was never published.

In Volume I is a poem by Lamb, "Living without God in the World." Other
contributors are Southey, Charles Lloyd, Joseph Cottle, Robert Lovell,
and Mrs. Opie.


SOUTHEY, ROBERT.--Roderick, The Last of the Goths. By Robert Southey,
Esq. Poet Laureate, and Member of the Royal Spanish Academy. London:
printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, . . . 1814. _4to,
original boards, uncut edges._

First edition.


SOUTHEY, ROBERT.--The Lay of the Laureate. Carmen Nuptiale, by Robert
Southey, Esq. Poet Laureate . . . London: Printed for Longman . . .
1816. _12mo, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Riviere._

First edition.


SOUTHEY, ROBERT.--Essays, Moral and Political, by Robert Southey . . .
now first collected. London: John Murray . . . MDCCCXXXII. _16mo, two
volumes, calf, gilt back, by Matthews._


SOUTHEY, ROBERT.--The Doctor, &c   London: Longman, Rees . . . 1839.
[-'47] _Crown 8vo, seven volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

An amalgamation of the first, second, and third editions, with the
curious coloured frontispiece to the seventh volume.


SOUTHEY, ROBERT.--The Poetical Works of Robert Southey. With a Memoir
. . . . Boston: Little, Brown, and Company. 1866. _12mo, ten volumes,
half cloth, uncut edges._

No. 13 of one hundred large paper copies printed, with portrait on India
paper.


SOUTHEY, ROBERT.--See Cowper, William (Works, 1835). Lobeira, Vasco de.
Moraes, Francisco de.


SPANISH BALLADS.--Ancient Spanish Ballads Historical and Romantic
Translated by J. G. Lockhart . . . William Blackwood Edinburgh . . .
MDCCCXXIII. _4to, Spanish calf, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by
White._

First edition, with engraved title and many pieces omitted in subsequent
editions.


SPANISH BALLADS.--Ancient Spanish Ballads; Historical and Romantic.
Translated, with notes, by J. G. Lockhart, Esq. A new edition, revised.
With numerous illustrations from drawings by William Allan, R. A.,
David Roberts, R. A., William Simson, Henry Warren, C. E. Aubrey, and
William Harvey. The borders and ornamental vignettes by Owen Jones,
architect. London: John Murray, . . . MDCCCXLI. _4to, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, doubled with rose morocco, ribbon panel in blue
mosaic, leaf branches, gilt top, uncut edges, by Ritter._


SPANISH BALLADS.--Ancient Spanish Ballads. 1841. _4to, citron levant
morocco, gilt and mosaic back, sides covered with a mosaic ribbon design
in brown, maroon, green, and red morocco, the intervals tooled in
conventionalized flowers, foliage, and dots, gilt edges, in a green
morocco case, by Mackenzie and F. Bedford._

Another copy.


SPANISH BALLADS.--Ancient Spanish Ballads; Historical and Romantic.
Translated, with notes, By J. G. Lockhart, Esq. With numerous
illustrations from drawings by William Allan, R. A., David Roberts, R.
A., Henry Warren, C. E. Aubrey, and William Harvey. The borders and
ornamental vignettes by Owen Jones. A new edition, revised. London: John
Murray, . . . 1859. _4to, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

The titles and sub-titles are printed in gold and colours, every page
has a coloured border, and a portrait of Lockhart by Doo after
Pickersgill prefaces the Biographical sketch.


SPANISH NOVELISTS, THE.--See Roscoe, Thomas.


SPECTATOR, THE.--See British Classics and British Essayists.


SPECULUM AMANTIS.--See Love Poems.


SPENCE, JOSEPH.--Anecdotes, Observations, and Characters, of Books and
Men. Collected from the conversation of Mr. Pope, and other eminent
persons of his time. By the Rev. Joseph Spence. Now first published
from the original papers, with notes, and a life of the author. By
Samuel Weller Singer. London: published by W. H. Carpenter . . .
MDCCC.XX. _8vo, half russia, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Printed by Whittingham at the Chiswick Press, with a portrait of Spence
by Bragg after Whood.


SPENCE, JOSEPH.--Anecdotes, Observations, and Characters. 1820. . . .
_Folio, half vellum, uncut edges._

Largest paper copy, with portrait on India paper.


SPENCE, JOSEPH.--Anecdotes, Observations, and Characters, of Books and
Men. Collected from the conversation of Mr. Pope, and other eminent
persons of his time. By the Rev. Joseph Spence. With notes, and a life
of the author. By Samuel Weller Singer, . . . Second Edition. London:
John Russell Smith, . . . 1858. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Large paper copy. Portrait by T. Bragg after Isaac Whood.


SPENCER, HERBERT.--Social Statics: or, the conditions essential to human
happiness specified, and the first of them developed. By Herbert
Spencer. London: John Chapman, . . . M DCCC LI. _8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


SPENCER, HERBERT.--Essays: scientific, political, and speculative.
(Second series.) By Herbert Spencer, . . . Reprinted, chiefly from the
Quarterly Reviews. Williams and Norgate, . . . London; . . . M DCCC
LXIII. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First separate edition.


SPENCER, HERBERT.--The Principles of Biology. By Herbert Spencer, . . .
Williams and Norgate, . . . London, . . . 1864. [-'67.] _8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


SPILLER, JAMES.--Spiller's Jests: or the Life and Pleasant Adventures
Of the late Celebrated Comedian Mr. James Spiller; containing His Merry
Jests, Diverting Songs, and Entertaining Tales. [Six lines in English]
London: Printed for H. Cook, . . . and S. Hester, . . . [n. d.] (Price
One Shilling) _8vo, green morocco, gilt edges. Bound with four other
works._

Portrait by Bell.

George Daniel's copy, with the following note on the fly leaf:
"'Spiller's Jests' I have never seen in any other collection." It is his
Life with a new title-page. It would seem that "Spiller's Life" was not
an attractive title; the publisher therefore cancelled the first title
and substituted the present one, as the two works are apparently the
same, except for the titles.


SPINGARN, JOEL ELIAS.--A History of Literary Criticism in the
Renaissance with special reference to the influence of Italy in the
formation and development of modern classicism   by Joel Elias Spingarn
   New York   published for the Columbia University Press by The
Macmillan Company . . . 1899. _12mo, cloth, uncut edges._

Presentation copy from the author.


SPRINGER, JARO.--. . . Gothic Alphabets . . . the text by Jaro Springer
Agents of the [International Chalcographical Society, 1897] London &c
[Berlin] _Folio, boards, uncut edges._

Thirty-nine full-page plates and five illustrations in the text.


SQUIER, EPHRAIM GEORGE.--Peru   Incidents of Travel and Exploration in
the Land of the Incas   By E. George Squier, . . . With illustrations
New York   Harper & Brothers, . . . 1877. _8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._


STAGE BEAUX.--The Stage-Beaux toss'd in a Blanket: or, Hypocrisie
Alamode; Expos'd in a True Picture of Jerry . . . [Jeremy Collier] a
Pretending Scourge to the English Stage. A Comedy. With A Prologue on
Occasional Conformity; being a full Explanation of the Poussin
Doctor's Book; and an Epilogue on the Reformers. Spoken at the
Theatre-Royal in Drury-lane. [One line from Juvenal] London, Printed,
and Sold by J. Nutt, near Stationers-Hall, 1704. Price One Shilling and
Six Pence. [Four lines of advertisement] _4to, contemporary brown
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges._

Large paper copy of the first edition of a play never acted. Half-title
and title, two leaves; a1-a4, and B1-I4 in fours.

A satire on Jeremy Collier, who wrote "A Short View of the Immorality
and Profaneness of the English Stage," 1698 (two editions), and was
answered by Congreve, Vanbrugh, Dennis, Dr. Drake, Dr. Filmer, and
others. (See Volume I, page 302, of this Catalogue.) Collier is
satirized under the name of Sir Jerry Witwoud.

The running title is "The Beaux of the Stage Toss'd in a Blanket &c;"
and the play is dedicated to Christopher Rich, Patentee of the
Theatre-Royal.

Attributed to Tom Brown and to Charles Gildon.


STANHOPE, HESTER, LADY.--Memoirs of the Lady Hester Stanhope, as related
by herself in conversations with her physician; comprising her opinions
and anecdotes of some of the most remarkable persons of her time . . .
London: Henry Colburn . . . 1845. _12mo, three volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition. Three plates and a plan.


STANHOPE, HESTER, LADY.--Travels of Lady Hester Stanhope; forming the
completion of her Memoirs. Narrated by her Physician . . . London: Henry
Colburn . . . 1846. _12mo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Three plates and twenty woodcut illustrations.


STANLEY, ARTHUR PENRHYN.--The Life and Correspondence of Thomas Arnold,
. . . by Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, . . . Third edition. London: B.
Fellowes, . . . 1844. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait by B. Hall after Thomas Phillips.


STANLEY, ARTHUR PENRHYN.--Lectures on the History of the Eastern Church
   with an introduction on the study of ecclesiastical history by Arthur
Penrhyn Stanley, . . . Second Edition   London   John Murray, . . . 1862
. . . _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Plan and coloured map of the Eastern Churches.


STANLEY, ARTHUR PENRHYN.--Lectures on the History of the Jewish Church
. . . . By Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, . . . With [4] maps and [3] plans.
Third edition. London: John Murray, . . . 1865. . . . _8vo, two volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._


STANLEY, GEORGE.--See Bryan and Stanley.


STANLEY, HENRY MORTON.--How I found Livingstone: travels, adventures and
discoveries in Central Africa: including an account of Four Months'
Residence with Dr. Livingstone, by Henry M. Stanley, . . . With Maps and
Illustrations after Drawings by the Author. Published only by
subscription. New York: Scribner, Armstrong & Co. 1872. . . . _8vo, one
volume in two, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition. Stanley's real name was John Rowlands when as a cabin-boy
he was adopted by a New Orleans merchant.


STANLEY, HENRY MORTON.--In Darkest Africa or the quest rescue and
retreat of Emin Governor of Equatoria by Henry M. Stanley . . . With one
hundred and fifty woodcut illustrations and maps. . . . London Sampson
Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington . . . 1890 . . . _8vo, two volumes,
half maroon morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


STAR CHAMBER.--A Decree of Star Chamber concerning Printing. Made July
11, 1637   Reprinted by the Grolier Club, from the first edition by
Robert Barker, 1637 [New York 1884] _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back
and sides, dentelle border inside, silk lining, gilt top, uncut edges,
by David._

No. 36 of one hundred and fifty copies printed, with the original covers
preserved.


STARR, R.--Specimen of Printing Types, by R. Starr & Co.
Letter-Founders, No. 8 Liberty-Street, Albany, [vignette] [Albany]
Printed by Packard & Van Benthuysen, . . . 1826. _8vo, original boards._


STEBBING, HENRY.--Lives of the Italian Poets. By the Rev. Henry
Stebbing, . . . Second edition. With numerous additions. . . . London:
Edward Bull, . . . 1832. _12mo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


STEDMAN, EDMUND CLARENCE.--Edgar Allan Poe. Boston   Houghton, Mifflin
and Company . . . MDCCCLXXXI. _16mo, red levant morocco, Janseniste,
gilt over uncut edges, by Marius Michel._

First edition, with the original vellum covers preserved.


STEDMAN, EDMUND CLARENCE.--Songs and Ballads by Edmund Clarence Stedman.
New York   printed for the Book Fellows' Club 1884. _Small 4to, cloth,
uncut edges._

One hundred copies printed, on Japan paper, with portrait of the author,
and numerous vignettes by Taylor.


STEDMAN, EDMUND CLARENCE.--Poets of America by Edmund Clarence Stedman
. . . Cambridge. Printed at the Riverside Press 1885. _8vo, two volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

No. 81 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with the ten
portraits on India paper.


STEDMAN, EDMUND CLARENCE.--Victorian Poets, revised, and extended, by a
supplementary chapter, to the fiftieth year of the period under review.
By Edmund Clarence Stedman . . . Cambridge: Printed at the Riverside
Press 1887. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 16 of two hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with the
portraits on India paper.


STEELE, SIR RICHARD.--The Funeral: or, Grief A-la-mode. a Comedy. As it
is Acted at The Theatre Royal in Drury-Lane, by His Majesty's Servants.
Written by Mr. Steele. [Three lines from Horace] London: Printed for
Jacob Tonson within Gray's-Inn-Gate, next Grey's-Inn-Lane. 1702. _4to,
half green levant morocco, gilt edges, by Roger de Coverly._

First edition: with the half-title, not in the British Museum copy.

Collation: Half-title, one leaf (verso blank). Title, one leaf (verso
blank). Dedication to the Countess of Albemarle, A1-A2 recto. Preface,
A2 verso-A3. Text, B1-L4 (verso Epilogue), in fours. Pages 1-79, last
page unnumbered, 74 and 75 reversed.


STEELE, SIR RICHARD.--The Tender Husband; or, the Accomplish'd Fools.
A Comedy. As it is Acted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. By Her
Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr. Steele. [Two lines from Tull. de
Oratore] London, Printed for Jacob Tonson, . . . 1705. _4to, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by David._

First edition. As this play was first produced in April, 1705, the date
of the first edition as 1703 in _Biographia Dramatica_ is obviously
incorrect.

Half-title and title, two leaves, and A-I3 in fours. Final leaf of
advertisement, I4. Dedication to Addison, Prologue by him.


STEELE, SIR RICHARD.--The Lucubrations of Isaac Bickerstaff Esq;
Vol. I. [Vol. II.] [Line from Homer] London, Printed: And sold by
John Morphew, near Stationers-Hall. MDCCX. [-M DCCXI.]

[** Right Index] Note, The Bookbinder is desired to place the Index
after [Tatler, N^{o}. 114.] which ends the First Volume in Folio, [after
Tatler, N^{o}. 271 which ends the Second Volume in Folio.] _Folio, two
volumes, green vellum, gilt sides, uncut edges._

The original 271 numbers of _The Tatler_ from April 12, 1709 to January
2, 1711, published three times a week, on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and
Saturdays.

From the libraries of Lord Hope and the Earl of Munster.

Collation: I. Title with ornament, A1 (verso blank). "To Mr.
Maynwaring," signed Isaac Bickerstaff, A2. Nos. 1-157 (single leaves),
from Tuesday, April 12, 1709 to Tuesday, April 11, 1710. Index, two
leaves, pages i-iv, ending with six lines of Errata and "[The Price of
these two Sheets, Three Pence.]" Number 1 reads "The Tatler. By
Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq; [Line in Latin] Tuesday, April 12, 1709. . . .
[Verso] London: Printed for the Author, 1709." The verso of Number
5 reads: "Sold by John Morphew near Stationers-Hall; where
Advertisements are taken in." Numbers 33 and 36-38 read: "The Tatler.
By Mrs. Jenny Distaff, Half Sister to Mr. Bickerstaff."

II. Title with ornament, A1 (verso blank). "To Edward Wortley Mountague
Esq," signed Isaac Bickerstaff, with the Note: "The Dedication
foregoing belongs to the Second Volume of Tatlers in Octavo; which begins
with N^{o} 51, and ends with N^{o} 114," A2 recto. "To the Honourable
William Lord Cowper, Baron of Wingham," signed Richard Steele, with the
Note: "The foregoing Dedication belongs to the Third Volume of Tatlers
in Octavo, which begins with N^{o} 115, and ends with N^{o} 189," A2
verso--and B1 (verso), "To the Right Honourable Charles Lord Hallifax,"
signed Richard Steele, dated "From the Hovel at Hampton-wick, April 7,
1711," and with the Note: "This Dedication belongs to the Fourth Volume of
Tatlers in Octavo, which begins with N^{o} 190, and ends with N^{o} 271."
"The Preface," B2. Pages i-viii. Numbers 158-271, Thursday, April 13,
1710 to Tuesday, January 2, 1711. Index, three leaves, pages i-vi,
ending "[The Price of these Three Sheets and a Half, Six Pence.]"


STEELE, SIR RICHARD.--[First page] Numb. I. The Guardian. [Line from
Martial] To be Continued Every Day. Thursday, March 12, 1713.
[Imprint] London: Printed for J. Tonson in the Strand; and Sold by A.
Baldwin in Warwick-Lane. 1713. _Folio, green vellum, gilt sides, uncut
edges._

The complete file of _The Guardian_ as originally issued, clxxv numbers,
from Thursday, March 12, 1713 to Thursday, October 1, 1713.

"Price Two Pence" appears on Number I and continues; "Where
Advertisements are taken in" is added to the imprint on Number II, and
"To be Continued every Day" is not found after that number.

From the libraries of Lord Hope and the Earl of Munster.


STEELE, SIR RICHARD.--[First page] Numb. I. The Englishman. Being the
Sequel of the Guardian. To be Published every Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday. Tuesday, October 6, 1713. [Latin quotation] [Verso.]
London: Printed for Sam Buckley, at the Dolphin in Little Britain; where
Advertisements will be taken in. [Numb. XXIII.--And Sold by Ferd.
Burleigh at the West-End of St. Paul's.] _Folio, green vellum, gilt
sides, uncut edges. Bound with "The Guardian._"

A Whig publication in which Steele combated the arguments of Swift,
Bolingbroke, and Atterbury in _The Examiner_.

Volume I, Numbers I-LVI, from Tuesday, October 6, 1713 to Thursday,
February 11, 1714. Each number is a single sheet. "Price Two-pence"
appears at the bottom of each leaf on the recto.


STEELE, SIR RICHARD.--[First page] Numb. I. The Lover. Written in
Imitation of the Tatler. [Line from Horace] To be Published every
Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. Thursday, February 25, 1714.
[Verso] London, Printed: And Sold by Ferd. Burleigh, in Amen-Corner.
Where Advertisements are taken in. _Folio, green vellum, gilt sides,
uncut edges. Bound with "The Guardian."_

Numbers I-XL through Thursday, May 27, 1714. On Number IV the name of
"Marmaduke Myrtle, Gent," i.e., Steele, first appears. Addison, who
assisted Steele, is said to have written Number X.


STEELE, SIR RICHARD.--The Crisis: or, a Discourse Representing, From the
most Authentick Records, The just Causes of the Happy Revolution: and
The several Settlements of the Crowns of England and Scotland on Her
Majesty; and on the Demise of her Majesty without Issue, upon the Most
Illustrious Princess Sophia, Electress and Duchess Dowager of Hanover,
and the Heirs of Her Body being Protestants; by previous Acts of both
Parliaments of the late Kingdoms of England and Scotland; and confirmed
by the Parliament of Great Britain. With some seasonable remarks On the
Danger of a Popish Successor . . . By Richard Steele Esq; London:
Printed by Sam. Buckley; and Sold by Ferd. Burleigh, . . . 1714. _4to,
red levant morocco, gilt back, side panel, uncut edges, by David._

First edition.


STEELE, SIR RICHARD, _editor_.--Poetical Miscellanies, Consisting of
original poems and translations. By the best Hands. Publish'd by Mr.
Steele. London: Printed for Jacob Tonson . . . MDDC XIV. _Small 8vo,
light brown levant morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition, with misprint in the date on the title-page, the leaves
of contents following the dedication, and a final blank leaf, X8.

Frontispiece by Du Guernier after Laguerre. Contains the first version
of Pope's "Wife of Bath her Prologue, From Chaucer," "The Arrival of
Ulysses in Ithaca, being Part of the XIIIth Book of Homer's Odysses,"
and "The Gardens of Alcinous, from the Seventh Book of Homer's Odysses."

Other contributors are Steele, Parnell, Eusden, Tickell, William
Harrison, and Gay.


STEELE, SIR RICHARD, _editor_.--Poetical Miscellanies, Consisting of
original poems and translations. By the best Hands. Publish'd by
Mr. Steele. London: Printed for Jacob Tonson . . . M DCC XIV. _Small
8vo, light brown levant morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Second edition, with the misprint in the date on the title-page
corrected, and the contents reset in smaller type in two leaves instead
of three. Although the text is the same, line for line, as in the first
edition, an examination of separate pages shows that the type has been
not only reset, but with a different fount. Page 193 gives clear
evidence of this fact. The brackets and ornaments in this edition are
different from those in the other. There is no final blank leaf, X8.


STEELE, SIR RICHARD.--The Dramatick Works Of the Late Sir Richard Steele
. . . London, Printed for W. Feales . . . [1730-'33.] _12mo, green
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

The separate titles are dated as follows: "The Conscious Lovers" (with a
frontispiece by G. Van der Gucht), fourth edition, 1733; "The Funeral,"
sixth edition, 1730; "The Tender Husband," fifth edition, 1731; "The
Lying Lover," fifth edition, 1732.


STEELE, SIR RICHARD.--The Dramatic Works of Sir Richard Steele, Knt.
Containing, The Funeral. The Tender Husband. The Lying Lover. The
Conscious Lovers. London: Printed for J. and R. Tonson, . . . MDCCLX.
_12mo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Portrait of Steele by Vertue after Kneller, and a frontispiece to each
play by G. Van der Gucht, J. Basire, and others.

The four plays have separate paginations and signatures. "The Funeral"
is dated 1758; "The Tender Husband," 1735; "The Lying Lover" (sixth
edition), 1760; and "The Conscious Lovers," 1760.


STEELE, SIR RICHARD.--The Dramatic Works of Sir Richard Steele, Knt.
containing,

  The Funeral.
  The Tender Husband.
  The Lying Lover.
  The Conscious Lovers.

To which is prefixed, An Account of his Life and Writings. London:
Printed for J. and R. Tonson, S. Crowder, . . . M DCC LXI. _12mo, red
straight-grain morocco, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Portrait by Vertue after Kneller, and three plates by Van der Gucht.

In this edition, as in the preceding, the four plays have separate
pagination and signatures. "The Funeral" is dated 1758; "The Tender
Husband," 1761; "The Lying Lover," 1760; and "The Conscious Lovers,"
1764.


STEELE AND ADDISON.--Le Spectateur, ou le Socrate Moderne, ou l'on voit
un Portrait naif des Moeurs de ce Siecle. Traduit de l'Anglois A
Amsterdam et A Leipzig, chez Arkstee & Mercus, MDCCLXVIII. _12mo, eight
volumes, red morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Derome the younger, with
his ticket._

Two portraits of Steele, and a frontispiece by Punt.

Volume VII is dated 1750, and Volume VI, 1767.


STEELE, SIR RICHARD.--See Addison, Joseph. The Spectator.


STEELE, ROBERT.--The Earliest English Music Printing   A description and
bibliography of English printed music to the close of the sixteenth
century   by Robert Steele   London printed for the Bibliographical
Society at the Chiswick Press December, 1903. _4to, original paper,
uncut edges._

No. XI of Illustrated Monographs.


STEEVENS, GEORGE.--See Hogarth, William.


STENT, PETER.--A Booke of Drawinges. Performed acording to the best
order for vse & Breuity that is yet Extant. London. Printed and are to
be sould by Peter Stent at the White horse in Guilt spur streete without
Newgate. 1650. _12mo, red morocco, gilt top, by Stikeman._

Engraved title and seventeen engravings.


STEPHENS, JOHN LLOYD.--Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas,
and Yucatan. By John L. Stephens . . . illustrated by numerous
engravings. New-York: Harper & Brothers . . . 1841. _8vo, two volumes,
citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Map and seventy-six illustrations.


STEPHENS, JOHN LLOYD.--Incidents of Travel in Yucatan. By John L.
Stephens . . . illustrated by 120 engravings. New York: published by
Harper & Brothers . . . 1848. _8vo, two volumes, half citron levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._


STERNE, LAURENCE.--The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman
. . . . [London] 1760-[MDCCLXVII.] _Small 8vo, nine volumes, calf, gilt
back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First edition.

The place of publication and name of printer, Dodsley, first appear in
Volume III, dated MDCCLXI, with a frontispiece by Ravenet after Hogarth,
and the marbled paper leaf. In Volume V the date is one year later, and
the publishers, Becket and Dehont, and the work is completed by this
firm, Volumes VII and VIII being dated MDCCLXV, and Volume IX, two years
later. Volumes V, VII, and IX have the autograph signature of the
author.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman
. . . . The Second Edition. London: Printed for R. and J. Dodsley . . .
M.DCC.LX. [-LXVII] _Small 8vo, nine volumes, red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Joly._

Volumes I and II contain the name of the printer, as they do not in the
first edition; the succeeding volumes are the same as in the preceding
item. Volume I contains a frontispiece by Ravenet after Hogarth, not
found in the first edition.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--La Vie et les Opinions de Tristram Shandy, [avec
Suite] Traduites de l'Anglois de Sterne, par M. Frenais. A Yorck, et se
trouve a Paris, chez Ruault [et Volland.] 1776-[1785.] _12mo, four
volumes, blue levant morocco, gilt back, edges entirely uncut, by
Belz-Niedree._


STERNE, LAURENCE.--The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman.
By the Rev. Laurence Sterne, M. A. to which is added The Sentimental
Journey. With illustrations by George Cruikshank. . . . London: James
Cochrane and Co., . . . 1832. _Post 8vo, two volumes, half maroon levant
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by V. Krafft._

Portrait by Freeman and eight other plates.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--. . . The Opinions of Tristram Shandy Gentleman   By
Laurence Sterne . . . With Eight Etchings by Damman from Original
Designs by Harry Furniss. London J. C. Nimmo and Bain . . . 1883. _8vo,
two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 71 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with proof
etchings on Japan paper.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy. By
Mr. Yorick. London: Printed for T. Becket and P. A. DeHondt . . .
MDCCLXVIII. _Small 8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by F. Bedford._

First edition.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--A Sentimental Journey. 1768. _8vo, two volumes,
sprinkled calf, gilt back, in a citron straight-grain morocco case._

Another large paper copy, with the inserted leaf of advertisement.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--A Sentimental Journey. 1768. _8vo, two volumes, red
levant morocco, back and sides covered with an elaborate mosaic of
olive, grey, citron, and pink morocco, in compartments, with alternate
floral emblems, doubled in red morocco with a heavy border and the
monogram R. H., gilt edges, in maroon levant morocco cases, by Mercier._

Large paper copy, with the inserted leaf of advertisement.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy. By
Mr. Yorick . . . London: Printed for T. Becket and P. A. De Hondt . . .
MDCCLXVIII. [New York: DeVinne & Co., 1885] _16mo, two volumes, maroon
levant morocco, back and sides elaborately tooled, doubled with red
morocco, wide dentelle border, green silk linings, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

Facsimile reprint of the first edition, on Holland paper. No. 1 of one
hundred copies printed. Illustrated by the insertion of four portraits
of the author, and thirty-two plates, including the designs of
Chasselat, Stothard, Archer, Craigg, Unwins, and the etchings by Hedouin
in two states, before and after letters.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--A Sentimental Journey. 1768-1885. _16mo, two volumes,
red morocco, back and sides beautifully tooled in the manner of Roger
Payne, gilt top, uncut edges, by Alfred Matthews._

One of four copies printed on vellum, with five water-colour drawings by
Fernand Coindre inserted.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy. By
Mr. Yorick. A new edition. London: Printed by A. Strahan; . . . MDCCXC.
_Small 8vo, red morocco, back and sides exquisitely tooled after the
manner of Roger Payne, gilt edges. De Bure's copy from the La Bedoyere
collection._

Two inserted plates by Tomkins after Edwards.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--Voyage Sentimental, suivi des Lettres d'Yorick a
Eliza, par Laurent Sterne, en Anglais et en Francais. Nouvelle edition,
dont la traduction francaise a ete entierement revue et corrigee sur le
texte anglais, ornee de six Figures d'apres Monsiau. A Paris . . . chez
J. E. Gabriel Dufour [imp. Didot] . . . l'an VII. [1799]. _18mo, three
volumes, original boards, uncut edges._

The six plates are engraved by Le Villain and are proofs before letters.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy. By
Mr. Yorick. London, stereotyped and printed by Andrew Wilson . . . 1807.
_12mo, half blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Woodcut illustrations.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy. By
Mr. Yorick. A New Edition, Embellished with Two Caricature Prints,
[coloured] by Rowlandson. London: published by Thomas Tegg . . . 1809.
_12mo, half brown levant morocco, uncut edges, by Riviere._


STERNE, LAURENCE.--A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy. By
Laurence Sterne. Illustrated with numerous engravings on wood, by
Bastin, and G. Nicholls: from original drawings by Jacque and Fussell.
London: J. E. Nicholls . . . [n. d.] _8vo, half red morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._


STERNE, LAURENCE.--Voyage Sentimental traduction nouvelle precedee d'un
Essai sur la Vie et les Ouvrages de Sterne par M. J. Janin Edition
illustree par MM. Tony Johannot et Jacque [vignette]   Paris Ernest
Bourdin, . . . [n. d.] _Imperial 8vo, half brown levant morocco, gilt
top, uncut edges._

Twelve full-page plates, and numerous illustrations in the text.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--Voyage Sentimental [n. d.] _Imperial 8vo, half blue
levant morocco, uncut edges, with the original covers in blue and gold._

Another copy.


STERNE AND SWIFT.--. . . A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy
By Laurence Sterne also A Tale of a Tub written for the universal
improvement of mankind . . . By Jonathan Swift . . . With Five Etchings
and Portrait by Ed. Hedouin. London J. C. Nimmo and Bain . . . 1882.
_8vo, two works in one volume, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 71 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with proof
etchings on Japan paper.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--Letters from Yorick to Eliza. London, Printed for G.
Kearsly, . . . and T. Evans, . . . 1775. _12mo, green levant morocco,
gilt back, side panels in floral design, gilt top, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition. Edited by Sterne's daughter, who dedicated the work to
Lord Apsley, Lord High Chancellor of England.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--The Works of Laurence Sterne . . . with a Life of the
author, written by himself. London: printed for W. Strahan . . .
MDCCLXXX. _Small 8vo, ten volumes, old calf, gilt back._

Two portraits and eight plates after the designs of Hogarth, Edwards,
and Rooker.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--The Works of Laurence Sterne . . . with a Life of the
author, written by himself . . . London: Printed for J. Johnson . . .
1803. _8vo, four volumes, calf, gilt back._

Large paper copy, with autograph letter of Sterne inserted. Portrait of
the author by Neagle after Reynolds, nine plates after Stothard's
designs, and a portrait and fifteen vignettes by Widnell after the
designs by Satchwell and Thurston.


STERNE, LAURENCE.--Original Letters of the late Reverend Mr. Laurence
Sterne; never before published. London: Printed at the Logographic Press
. . . 1788. _12mo, sprinkled calf, gilt back, corner ornaments on the
sides, gilt edges._


STERNE, LAURENCE.--Seven Letters written by Sterne and his friends,
hitherto unpublished. Edited by W. Durrant Cooper, F. S. A. London:
printed for private circulation, by T. Richards, . . . 1844. _8vo,
original paper wrappers._


STEVENS, HENRY.--Catalogue of My English Library; collected and
described by Henry Stevens . . . London: Printed by C. Whittingham, Nov.
1853. _Post 8vo, half green morocco, interleaved, gilt top, uncut
edges._


STEVENS, HENRY.--Catalogue of my English Library. 1853. _Post 8vo, blue
levant morocco, blind-tooled, Stevens's monogram on the upper cover,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Pratt._

Stevens's own copy.


STEVENS, HENRY.--Historical Nuggets Bibliotheca Americana or a
descriptive account of my collection of rare books relating to America
Henry Stevens G. M. B. F. S. A. . . . London printed by Whittingham and
Wilkins . . . MDCCCLXII. _Post 8vo, two volumes, blue levant morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Pratt._

Stevens's own copy, with his monogram on the front cover.


STEVENS, HENRY.--Benjamin Franklin's Life and Writings   A Bibliographical
Essay On the Stevens' Collection of Books and Manuscripts Relating to
Doctor Franklin By Henry Stevens of Vermont . . . [cut of Franklin] London
   Printed by Messrs Davy & Sons at the Dryden Press . . . for the Author
. . . cI[** inverted c]. I[** inverted c]. ccc Lxxxi. _Royal 8vo, original
cloth, uncut edges._

Four portraits of Franklin by G. F. Storm, T. B. Welch after D. Martin,
J. Andrews after Duplessis, T. B. Welch after Houdon's bust; a portrait
of Mrs. Franklin by J. Andrews, and a facsimile letter.


STEVENS, HENRY.--Who Spoils our New English Books Asked and Answered by
Henry Stevens of Vermont . . . [cut] London   Henry Newton Stevens . . .
[Chiswick Press]   M DCCC LXXXIV. _16mo, cloth, gilt top, uncut
edges._


STEVENS, JOHN.--The Spanish Libertines: or, the Lives of Justina, The
Country Jilt; Celestina, The Bawd of Madrid; and Estevanillo Gonzales,
The most Arch and Comical of Scoundrels. To which is added, a play,
call'd An Evenings Adventures. All Four Written by Eminent Spanish
Authors, and now first made English by Captain John Stevens. London
   Printed, and Sold by J. How, . . . 1707. _8vo, green morocco, gilt
back, side corners, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._


STEVENSON, JOHN HALL.--Crazy Tales. . . . London: Printed in the Year M
DCC LXII. _4to, green levant morocco, gilt back, side corners, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Oval frontispiece, "Crazy Castle."


STEVENSON, JOHN HALL.--The Works of John-Hall-Stevenson, Esq.
containing,

  Crazy Tales.
  Fables for Grown Gentlemen.
  Lyric Epistles.
  Pastoral Cordial.
  Pastoral Puke.
  Macarony Fables.
  Lyric Consolations.
  Moral Tales.
  Monkish Epitaphs.
  &c. &c. &c.

Corrected and enlarged. With several original poems, now first printed,
and explanatory notes . . . London, printed by J. Nichols, for J.
Debrett, . . . and T. Beckett, . . . MDCCXCV. _8vo, three volumes, calf,
gilt back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Two frontispieces.


STEVENSON, J. J.--House Architecture. By J. J. Stevenson, . . .
Architecture. [and House-Planning] London: Macmillan and Co. 1880.
_Royal 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Illustrated with one hundred and ninety woodcuts.


STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS.--The Silverado Squatters by Robert Louis
Stevenson. London Chatto and Windus . . . 1883. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First published edition, with a frontispiece. The first printed edition
was an 8vo of fourteen leaves in paper wrappers, of which only ten
copies were issued, October 17, 1883, to secure copyright in England.


STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS.--Kidnapped being Memoirs of the Adventures of
David Balfour in the year 1751 . . . [with a map] By Robert Louis
Stevenson. Cassell & Company . . . [London] MDCCC.LXXXVI. _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First published edition. The first printed edition, issued to secure
copyright, was an undated quarto of twenty-seven pages.


STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS.--Prince Otto A Romance by Robert Louis
Stevenson   Third edition. London   Chatto & Windus . . . 1886. _Crown
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS.--The Merry Men and Other Tales and Fables by
Robert Louis Stevenson. Second edition. London Chatto & Windus . . .
1887. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS.--Memories & Portraits by Robert Louis
Stevenson. London Chatto and Windus . . . 1887. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS.--Virginibus Puerisque and other papers by
Robert Louis Stevenson   third edition. London Chatto and Windus . . .
1888. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS.--The Black Arrow A Tale of the Two Roses by
Robert Louis Stevenson. New York Charles Scribner's Sons   1888 . . .
_Crown 8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt back, figured green silk
sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Author's edition: with twelve illustrations.


STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS.--Familiar Studies of Men and Books by Robert
Louis Stevenson Third edition. London Chatto and Windus . . . 1888.
_Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS.--New Arabian Nights by Robert Louis Stevenson.
London Chatto & Windus . . . 1888. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS.--The Master of Ballantrae. A Winter's Tale. By
Robert Louis Stevenson . . . Cassell & Company . . . London . . . 1889.
_Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First published edition. The first printed edition was issued in 1888,
and was called on the title-page "Author's Edition."


STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS.--Across the Plains with other Memories and
Essays by Robert Louis Stevenson   London Chatto & Windus, . . . 1892.
_4to, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 44 of one hundred large paper copies printed.


STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS.--Father Damien by Robert Louis Stevenson
Portland, Maine Thomas B. Mosher   Mdcccxcvij. _16mo, vellum boards,
uncut edges._

Portrait after Edward Clifford.


STEWART, JAMES.--Plocacosmos: or the whole Art of Hair Dressing; wherein
is contained, Ample Rules for the Young Artizan, more particularly for
ladies women, valets, &c. &c. as well as Directions for Persons to
dress their own Hair; also Ample and wholesome Rules to preserve
the Hair. The Hair completely analyzed, as to its Growth, Nature,
Colour, &c. and all and every Article used in the Hair, on the Head,
Face, &c. as, False Hair, Perfumery, Cosmetics, &c. clearly analyzed and
examined; with a History of the Hair and Head Dress, from the
earliest Ages to the present Time, particularly as they have
appeared upon the English Stage for these last Two Hundred Years;
with Strictures on the present Performers belonging to each Theatre.

The Plan of this Work requiring it, there are also complete Rules for
the Management of Children and Education of Youth; . . . By James
Stewart. With an elegant Frontispiece, and other Copper-Plates. London:
Printed for the Author, . . . M DCC LXXXII. _8vo, light brown levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece in bistre, "Shakespeare's Seven Ages," and ten other
plates, all by Delegal.


STIRLING-MAXWELL, SIR WILLIAM.--Songs of the Holy Land   Edinburgh
[Constable] M.DCCCXLVI. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Forty copies privately printed


STIRLING-MAXWELL, SIR WILLIAM.--Annals of the Artists of Spain. By
William Stirling, M. A. . . . London: John Ollivier, . . . MDCCCXLVIII.
_8vo, three volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._

First edition, with coloured frontispiece-titles and initial letters.


STIRLING-MAXWELL, SIR WILLIAM.--Annals of the Artists of Spain by Sir
William Stirling-Maxwell . . . A New Edition incorporating the author's
own notes additions and emendations   With Portrait and Twenty-four
Steel and Mezzotint Engravings also numerous engravings on wood London
John C. Nimmo . . . M DCCCXCI. _8vo, four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 402 of four hundred and fifteen large paper copies printed, with a
duplicate set of plates on Japan paper, and the initial letters and
rules printed in red.


STIRLING-MAXWELL, SIR WILLIAM.--The Cloister Life of the Emperor Charles
the Fifth, [portrait] By William Stirling . . . Third edition, enlarged
and corrected. London: John W. Parker and Son . . . MDCCCLIII. _Crown
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


STIRLING-MAXWELL, SIR WILLIAM.--The Cloister Life of the Emperor Charles
V. by Sir William Stirling-Maxwell . . . Fourth edition incorporating
the author's latest notes additions and emendations With Eight Mezzotint
Engravings and Five Illustrations in Colour engraved from the Original
Water-Colour Sketches also numerous engravings on wood   London John C.
Nimmo . . . M DCCC XCI. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 403 of four hundred and fifteen copies printed on large paper, with
the engravings in duplicate, bistre on Japan paper, and the initial
letters and rules printed in red.


STIRLING-MAXWELL, SIR WILLIAM.--Velazqvez and his Works by William
Stirling. London: John W. Parker and Son . . . 1855. _Post 8vo, citron
levant morocco, Roger Payne back and side corners, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

First edition.


STIRLING-MAXWELL, SIR WILLIAM.--Don John of Austria or passages from the
history of the sixteenth century 1547-1578   Illustrated with numerous
wood engravings [vignette] by the late Sir William Stirling-Maxwell . . .
London: Longmans, Green, and Co., M DCCC LXXX III. _Royal 8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


STIRLING-MAXWELL, SIR WILLIAM.--Miscellaneous Essays and Addresses by
Sir William Stirling-Maxwell . . . also biographical note and
bibliography Illustrated with Six Engravings   London   John C. Nimmo . . .
M DCCC XCI. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 403 of four hundred and fifteen copies printed on large paper, with
a duplicate set of the six engravings in bistre on Japan paper, and the
initial letters and rules printed in red.


STITH, WILLIAM.--The History of the First Discovery and Settlement of
Virginia: being An Essay towards a General History of this Colony. By
William Stith. A. M. Rector of Henrico Parish, and one of the
Governors of William and Mary College. . . . Williamsburg: Printed by
William Parks. M,DCC,XLVII. _8vo, sprinkled calf, gilt back, gilt edges,
by Bedford._

First edition, with the Appendix, containing a collection of charters
relating to the period described.


STOCKTON, FRANK RICHARD.--The Captain's Toll-Gate   By Frank R. Stockton
With a Memorial Sketch by Mrs. Stockton   And a Bibliography
Illustrated   New York   D. Appleton & Company 1903. _8vo, half vellum,
gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 67 of one hundred and sixty large paper copies printed, with
portrait etched by Jacques Reich and four other illustrations.


STODDART, THOMAS TOD.--The Angler's Companion to the Rivers and Lochs of
Scotland. By Thomas Tod Stoddart. William Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh
and London M.DCCC.XLVII. _8vo, half brown levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Steel frontispiece, coloured plate of flies, woodcuts, and a large
folded map.


STONE, MRS.--Chronicles of Fashion, from the time of Elizabeth to the
early part of the Nineteenth Century, in Manners, Amusements, Banquets,
Costume &c. By Mrs. Stone . . . London: Richard Bentley . . . 1845.
_8vo, two volumes, half orange levant morocco, gilt back, figured silk
sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Fifteen steel portraits.


STORER, JAMES.--History and Antiquities of the Cathedral Churches of
Great Britain. [27] Illustrated with a series of highly-finished
Engravings, Exhibiting general and particular Views, Ground Plans, and
all the architectural Features and Ornaments in the various Styles of
Building used in our Ecclesiastical Edifices. By James Storer. . . .
London: published by Rivingtons; Murray; . . . MDCCCXIV. [-XIX.] Coe,
Printer . . . _4to, four volumes, blue morocco, gilt back, gilt edges,
by W. Matthews._

Largest paper copy of the first edition, with the two hundred and
fifty-six plate proofs on India paper.


STORY, WILLIAM WETMORE.--Graffiti d'Italia by W. W. Story. William
Blackwood and Sons Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLXVIII. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


STORY, WILLIAM WETMORE.--Poems by William Wetmore Story . . . Boston . . .
Houghton, Mifflin and Company . . . 1887. _16mo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._


STORY, WILLIAM WETMORE.--Roba di Roma by William Wetmore Story . . .
Boston and New York Houghton, Mifflin and Company . . . 1887. _12mo, two
volumes, half green levant morocco, uncut edges._


STORY, WILLIAM WETMORE.--A Poet's Portfolio Later Readings   by William
Wetmore Story . . . Boston and New York Houghton, Mifflin and Company . . .
1894. _16mo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


STORY, WILLIAM WETMORE.--See Lowell, J. R. The Pioneer.


STOTHARD, THOMAS.--The Alphabet engraved on wood from designs by Tho.
Stothard Esq. R. A. London: William Pickering. 1830. _12mo, red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._


STOWE, HARRIET BEECHER.--Uncle Tom's Cabin; or, Life among the Lowly. By
Harriet Beecher Stowe. [woodcut] Boston: John P. Jewett & Company. . . .
1852. _12mo, two volumes, original cloth, in a brown levant morocco
case._

First American edition. Presentation copy from the author, with
inscription.


STOWE, HARRIET BEECHER.--Uncle Tom's Cabin. By Harriet Beecher Stowe.
With Twenty-seven Illustrations on Wood by George Cruikshank, Esq.
London: John Cassell, . . . 1852. _8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Riviere._

First English edition, with the original covers preserved.


STOWE, HARRIET BEECHER.--Uncle Tom's Cabin; or, the History of a
Christian Slave. By Harriet Beecher Stowe. With an Introduction by Elihu
Burritt. Illustrated by sixteen engravings by Johnston, from original
designs by Anelay . . . London: Partridge and Oakey . . . 1853. _8vo,
half green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Krafft._


STOWE, HARRIET BEECHER.--La Cabane de l'Oncle Tom ou les noirs en
amerique par Mistress Harriet Beecher Stowe traduction revue, corrigee
et accompagnee de notes par Leon de Wally et Edmond Texier ornee de 5
gravures sur acier d'apres Andrieux. Deuxieme edition. Paris Perrotin,
. . . 1853. _8vo, half red levant morocco, gilt back, uncut edges, with
the original covers bound in, by Carayon._


STOWE, HARRIET BEECHER.--A Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin; presenting the
original facts and documents upon which the story is founded. Together
with Corroborative Statements verifying the truth of the work. By
Harriet Beecher Stowe, . . . Boston: published by John P. Jewett & Co.
. . . 1853. _8vo, figured brown silk, uncut edges, with the original
covers bound in, by The Club Bindery._


STOWE, HARRIET BEECHER.--La Case de l'Oncle Tom ou tableaux de
l'esclavage dans les Etats-Unis d'Amerique; par Mistress Harriet Beecher
Stowe. Traduction nouvelle par Old Nick & Adolphe Joanne, . . . precedee
d'un portrait et de la biographie de l'auteur; ornee d'un grand nombre
de gravures d'apres les dessins de George Cruikshank; suivie de poesies
composees par des negres et d'une notice sur la colonie de Liberia.
[vignette] Paris. Aux Bureaux du Magasin Pittoresque, . . . 1853. _Royal
8vo, cloth, uncut edges, with the original covers bound in._


STOWE, HARRIET BEECHER.--La Clef de la Case de l'Oncle Tom contenant les
faits et les documents originaux sur lesquels le roman est fonde, avec
les pieces justificatives; par Mistress Harriet Beecher Stowe. Ouvrage
traduit par Old Nick & Adolphe Joanne, . . . Paris. Aux Bureaux du
Magasin Pittoresque, . . . 1853. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


STRANG, WILLIAM.--See Singer and Strang.


STRAPAROLA.--The Nights of Straparola now first translated into English
by W. G. Waters illustrated by E. R. Hughes, . . . London: Lawrence and
Bullen . . . M DCCC XCIV. _4to, two volumes, half vellum, uncut edges._

No. 17 of two hundred and ten copies printed on Japanese vellum, with
twenty illustrations.


STREATFEILD, THOMAS.--(I.) Ton and Antiquity A Comedy, in two acts.
Written for the L. D. T. and performed January 1^{st} 1798 . . . Oxford:
printed by R. Slatter. [1799] (II.) The Road to Ridicule: A Comedy, in
two acts. Written for the L. D. T. and performed January 9, 1799 . . .
Oxford: printed by R. Slatter. [1799] (III.) Prologues And Epilogues,
written for the L. D. T. on various occasions. 1797-8-9 . . . Oxford:
printed by R. Slatter. [1799] _8vo, brown levant morocco, Janseniste,
gilt edges, by Smith-Mansell. Bound with WALPOLE'S "Mysterious Mother,"
1781._

These three pieces, privately printed, are illustrated by a portrait of
the author and two scenes from the Comedies, beautifully executed in
water-colours.


STRICKLAND, AGNES.--Lives of the Queens of England, From the Norman
Conquest. Now first published from official records & other authentic
documents, private as well as public. By Agnes Strickland. . . . A new
edition, revised and greatly augmented. Embellished with portraits of
every queen. . . . [and engraved titles] London: Colburn & Co., . .
1852. _8vo, eight volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


STROLLERS.--The Strollers Pacquet open'd. Containing Seven Jovial Drolls
or Farces, Calculated for the Meridian of Bartholomew and Southwark
Fairs. Representing the Comical Humours of Designing Usurers, Sly
Pettifoggers, Cunning Sharpers, Cowardly Bullies, Wild Rakes, Finical
Fops, Shrewd Clowns, Testy Masters, Arch Footmen, Forward Widows,
Stale Maids, and Melting Lasses. London: Printed and Sold by A.
Jackson . . . M D CC XLII. _12mo, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Pratt._

The general title is dated 1742, the sub-titles, 1741. A collection of
seven drolls, as follows: (1) The Bilker bilk'd, or, a Banquet of Wiles
(from "The Woman's Revenge," by Charles Bullock), A1-B6 in sixes; (2)
The Witchcraft of Love, or, Stratagem on Stratagem (from Mrs.
Centlivre's "Man's bewitch'd; or, The Devil to do about her"), C1-F3;
(3) The Braggadochio: or, His Worship, the Cully (from Congreve's "Old
Bachelor"), F4-H2; (4) The Feign'd Shipwreck, or, the Imaginary Heir
(from "The Elder Brother," by Beaumont and Fletcher), H3-L1; (5) The
Guardians over-reached in their own humour, or, the Lover Metamorphos'd
(from Mrs. Centlivre's "Bold Stroke for a Wife"), L2-O6; (6) The Sexes
Mismatch'd; or a New Way to get a Husband (from Southerne's "Oroonoko"
and "Monsieur Thomas," by Beaumont and Fletcher), P1-R5; (7) The
Litigious Suitor defeated: or a new Trick to get a Wife (from Bullock's
"Woman's a Riddle"), R6-T5.

The first droll has no sub-title.


STRUTT, JOSEPH.--A Biographical Dictionary; containing an Historical
Account of all the Engravers, from the Earliest Period of the Art of
Engraving to the Present Time; and a short list of their most esteemed
works. With the Cyphers, Monograms, and particular marks, used by each
master, accurately copied from the originals, and properly explained. To
which is prefixed, an Essay on the Rise and Progress of the Art of
Engraving, both on copper and on wood. With several curious specimens of
the performances of the most ancient Artists. By Joseph Strutt. London:
printed by J. Davis, for Robert Faulder, . . . MDCCLXXXV. _4to, two
volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
F. Bedford._

Sixteen plates.


STRUTT, JOSEPH.--Biographical Dictionary. 1785. _4to, two volumes, red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Another copy. Inserted are one hundred and fifty-nine examples of
engraving by Bartolozzi, Nanteuil, Wille, Marshall, Peter de Jode, B.
Beham, and others, and many portraits of the artists, in mezzotint,
line, and stipple engraving, including the portrait of John Florio by
Hole, Lucas de Leyda by Stokius, Charles II of England by Meyssens,
Scudery by Nanteuil, Montaigne by Ficquet, Evelyn by Bartolozzi, Mlle.
Camargo by Bickham, and many other examples.


STRUTT, JOSEPH.--The Sports and Pastimes of the People of England.
Including the rural and domestic recreations, May games, mummeries,
shows, processions, pageants, and pompous spectacles, from the earliest
period to the present time. By Joseph Strutt. Illustrated by one hundred
and forty engravings, in which are represented most of the popular
diversions; selected from ancient paintings. A new edition, with a
copious index, by William Hone, . . . London: printed for Thomas Tegg,
. . . 1831. _Royal 8vo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, with engravings coloured by hand.


STURT, JOHN.--The Orthodox Communicant, by way of Meditation On the
Order for the Administration of the Lord's-Supper, or Holy Communion;
According to the Liturgy of the Church of England, [vignette] London,
Engraven by J. Sturt & Sold by R. Ware . . . & J. Tinney . . . [n.d.]
_8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, side corners, centre ornaments,
gilt over uncut edges, by F. Bedford._

Engraved throughout. Eighty-eight vignettes and tail-pieces, and
numerous initial letters.


SUDERMANN, HERMANN.--The Joy of Living (Es lebe das Leben) a play in
five acts by Hermann Sudermann translated from the German by Edith
Wharton Charles Scribner's Sons   New York 1903. _12mo, boards, gilt
top, uncut edges._


SUETONIUS.--The Lives of the First Twelve Caesars, translated from the
Latin of C. Suetonius Tranquillus: with annotations and a review of the
government and literature of the different periods. By Alexander Thomson
. . . London: printed for G. G. and J. Robinson . . . M.DCC.XCVI. _8vo,
half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


SUFFOLK-BERKELEY, HENRIETTA AND GEORGE.--Letters to and from Henrietta,
Countess of Suffolk, and her second husband, the Hon. George Berkeley;
from 1712 to 1767. With historical, biographical, and explanatory Notes.
London: John Murray, . . . 1824. _8vo, two volumes, half sheep, uncut
edges._

Portrait of Lady Suffolk by Scriven.


SUFFOLK GARLAND.--The Suffolk Garland: or, a Collection of Poems, Songs,
Tales, Ballads, Sonnets, and Elegies, Legendary and Romantic, Historical
and Descriptive, relative to that county; And Illustrative of its
Scenery, Places, Biography, Manners, Habits and Customs. [cut] . . .
Ipswich: Printed and Sold by John Raw; . . . MDCCCXVIII. _4to, citron
levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut edges._


SURTEES, ROBERT SMITH.--Handley Cross; or, Mr. Jorrocks's Hunt. By the
author of "Mr. Sponge's Sporting Tour," &c . . . [cut]   With
illustrations by John Leech. London: Bradbury and Evans, . . . 1854.
_8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Eighteen coloured plates and eighty-five woodcuts.


SURTEES, ROBERT SMITH.--"Ask Mamma;" or, the Richest Commoner in England
with illustrations by John Leech. London: Bradbury, Evans, & Co., . . .
1872. _8vo, orange levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Joly._

Thirteen coloured plates and sixty-nine woodcut illustrations.


SWEDENBORG, EMANUEL.--Heaven and its Wonders, the world of spirits, (or
the intermediate region, which is the first receptacle after death,) and
Hell: described by one who has heard and seen what he relates. From the
Latin of Emanuel Swedenborg . . . Translated by the Rev. Samuel Noble.
Second Edition, carefully revised . . . London: James S. Hodson . . .
1851. _8vo, red morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--A Tale of a Tub. Written for the Universal Improvement
of Mankind . . . To which is added, An Account of a Battel between the
Antient and Modern Books in St. James's Library . . . London: Printed
for John Nutt . . . MDCCIV. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, doubled
with green morocco, wide borders, green silk guards, gilt edges, by A.
Meyer._

First edition. At page 279 is a title, as follows: "A Discourse
concerning the Mechanical Operation of the Spirit," etc.; the
pagination, however, continues without interruption, showing an omission
on the first title, for the conditions are the same as those governing
the Battle of the Books.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--(I-II.) Le Conte du Tonneau, Contenant tout ce que les
Arts, & les Sciences Ont de plus Sublime Et le plus Mysterieux; Avec
plusieurs autres Pieces tres-curieuses. Par Jonathan Swift . . . Traduit
de l'Anglois. A La Haye, Chez Henri Scheurleer, M.DCC.XXXII. (III.)
Traite des Dissensions entre les nobles et le peuple, Dans les
Republiques d'Athenes & de Rome, &c. L'Art de ramper en Poesie, et l'Art
du mensonge Politique; . . . pour servir de Suite au Conte du Tonneau. A
Amsterdam, Aux Depens de la Compagnie. M.DCC.XXXIII. _12mo, three
volumes, green morocco, gilt back and sides, red silk linings, gilt over
uncut edges, by Derome._

Seven curious copper-plate engravings illustrate the first volume.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--A Tale of a Tub, written for the universal improvement
of mankind. . . . To which is added, an Account of a Battle between The
Ancient and Modern Books in St. James's library: With the author's
apology, and explanatory notes, by W. Wotton, B. D. and others. . . .
London: printed for Thomas Tegg, . . . 1811. _Crown 8vo, Scotch plaid
silk, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Coloured frontispiece by Rhodes after Thurston, and six other coloured
plates.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Part of the Seventh Epistle of the First Book of
Horace imitated: and Address'd to a Noble Peer. London: Printed for A.
Dodd, at the Peacock without Temple-Bar. 1713. Price 3d. _4to, calf,
gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.

Collation: Title, A1 (verso blank). Text, A2-B2, in fours. Pages 1-12.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Les Trois Justaucorps, conte bleu, tire de l'Anglois
du Reverend Mr. Jonathan Swif. . . . avec les Trois Anneaux, nouvelle
tiree de Boccace. A Dublin. M.DCC.XXI. _8vo, red morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt edges, by Derome._

Two pieces in one volume, the second, "Recueil de Pieces Serieuses,
Comiques, et Burlesques." [S. L.] M.DCC.XXI.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--A Letter to the Shopkeepers, Tradesmen, Farmers and
Common People of Ireland, concerning the Brass-Half-Pence coined by onb
William Wood, Hard-ware-Man, With a Design to have them pass in this
Kingdom. Wherein in Shewn The Power of his Patent, the Value of his
Half-Pence, and how far every Person may be obliged to take the same
in Payments, and how to behave himself, in case such an Attempt
should be made by Wood, or any other Person. (Very proper to be kept
in every Family.) By M. B. Drapier. [Dublin] Written in the Year 1724.
_8vo, sprinkled calf._

First separate edition.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--The Hibernian Patriot: Being a Collection of the
Drapier's Letters to the People of Ireland, concerning Mr. Wood's
Brass Half-Pence. Together with Considerations on the Attempts made to
pass that Coin. And Reasons for the People of Ireland's refusing it.
To which are added, Poems and Songs relating to the same Subject. . . .
Printed at Dublin. London: Reprinted and Sold by A. Moor. . . . M DCC
XXX. _8vo, sprinkled calf, gilt top._


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--(I.) Cadenus and Vanessa. a poem. From the Original
Copy. Dublin: Printed in the Year, 2726. [1726] (II.) Cadenus and
Vanessa. a poem. By Dr. S--t. London, Printed for N. Blandford, at the
London-Gazette, Charing-Cross; and sold by J. Peele, at Locke's-Head
in Pater-noster-Row. 1726. (Price 6d.) (III.) Cadenus and Vanessa. a
poem. London, Printed: And Sold by J. Roberts at the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick-Lane, 1726. Price 6d. _8vo, three works in one volume, green
levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Although "Vanessa" [Hester Vanhomrigh] died in 1723, the present poem
did not appear until 1726, when it was published by three different
booksellers. The first edition was probably printed in Dublin, the
second by W. Blandford, practically a reprint of the first; the third by
J. Roberts, which contains some variations from the others, notably the
addition on page 35 of the ten lines beginning "But what Success
Vanessa met."

Collation: I. Title with floral ornament, A1 (verso blank). Text, A2-D4,
in fours. Pages 1-32.

II. Title with floral ornament, A1 (verso blank). Text, A2-D4 (verso
blank), in fours.

III. Half-title, A1 (verso blank). Title with ornament, A2 (verso
blank). Pages 1-31. Text, A3, numbered 4-E3 (verso blank), in fours.
Pages 1-37.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Cadenus and Vanessa. 1726. _8vo, blue levant morocco,
centre ornaments on the sides, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Another copy of the Roberts edition, larger than the preceding.

Collation: The same as the preceding copy.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--(I.) Travels into several Remote Nations of the World.
In Four Parts. By Lemuel Gulliver, First a Surgeon, and then a Captain
of several Ships. Vol. I. London: Printed for Benj. Motte, at the
Middle Temple-Gate in Fleet-Street. M DCC XXVI. (II.) Travels into
several Remote Nations of the World. By Captain Lemuel Gulliver. Vol.
II. Part III. A Voyage to Laputa, Balnibarbi, Glubbdubdribb, Luggnagg,
and Japan. Part IV. A Voyage to the Houyhnhnms. London: Printed for
Benjamin Motte, at the Middle-Temple-Gate. M DCC XXVI. _8vo, four parts
in two volumes, red straight-grain morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

An uncut copy of one of four editions published in 1726. Presumably the
first edition, with the misprints "subsidues," instead of "subsidies,"
Part I, page 35, line 5, and "_ebe_ Houyhnhmns" in the running headline,
Part IV, page 165.

Portrait of Gulliver by Sturt and Sheppard, with inscription around the
oval and two lines of Latin beneath; also six maps.

Collation: I. A1 (verso blank). Contents, A2 recto. "The Publisher to
the Reader," signed Richard Sympson, A2 verso-A4. Title of Part I, 1726,
with floral ornament, A5 recto. Contents, A5 verso-A6. Pages i-xii. Text
of Part I, A7-K8, in eights. Pages 1-148.

Title of Part II, 1726, A1 (verso blank). Contents, A2-A3, Plate II, A4
(recto blank). Text of Part II, B1-M2, in eights. Pages 1-164.

II. Title, A1 (verso blank). Contents, A2-A3. Plate III, A4 (recto
blank). Text of Part III, B1-L5, in eights. Pages 1-154.

Title of Part IV, A1 (verso blank). Contents, A2-A4. Text, B1-O4 (verso
blank). Pages 1-199. Key dated "Jan. Feb. March. 1743," one leaf (verso
blank).


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--(I.) Travels into several Remote Nations of the World.
In Four Parts. By Lemuel Gulliver, First a Surgeon, and then a Captain
of several Ships. Vol. I. London: Printed for Benj. Motte, at the
Middle Temple-Gate in Fleet-street. M DCC XX VI. (II.) Travels into
several Remote Nations of the World. By Captain Lemuel Gulliver. Part
III. A Voyage to Laputa, Balnibarbi, Glubbdubdrib, Luggnagg and Japan.
Part IV. A Voyage to the Houyhnhnms. London: Printed for Benjamin Motte,
at the Middle-Temple-Gate. M DCC XXVI. _8vo, four parts in two volumes,
green levant morocco, gilt back, side borders in floral and bird
design, doubled with red morocco, floral border, red figured silk
guards, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Presumably the second edition. One of the three large paper copies on
record, a second being in the British Museum. This one measures 9 by
5-3/8 inches, and besides the six maps, has a portrait of Gulliver
without the inscription around the oval. Instead of two lines in Latin
beneath, the legend is "Captain Lemuel Gulliver, of Redriff AEtat. suae
58."

The two title-pages of Volume I appear to be the same as in the
preceding edition, but in Volume II "Glubbdubdrib" has one final "b"
instead of two, and "Vol. II." is omitted. The type of "World" is
heavier faced in this edition. The text is reset; ornaments, use of
type, and spelling are different. In the Contents of Volume II,
"Pirates" in Chapter I is here spelled "Pyrates." Page 74 of Part III is
misprinted 44 in this edition, and not in the preceding; but the
misprint in the running headline on page 165, Part IV, is here corrected
to "_the_ Houyhnhmns." "Glubbdubdrib" is spelled without the final "b"
in the text of both editions, except at the head of Chapter I, in the
preceding, which would point to the final "bb" on the title of Volume II
as a misprint corrected in the present edition.

In both editions Chapter VII of Part III is misprinted Chapter V. Part
III of the present edition contains 155 pages, whereas the previous
edition contains 154 and ends with a different signature.

Collation: I. Title, A1 (verso blank). Contents, A2 (verso blank). "The
Publisher to the Reader," signed Richard Sympson, A3-A5 (verso blank).
Title of Part I, 1726, with the same floral ornament as in the preceding
edition, A6 (verso blank). Contents, A7-A8. Pages i-xvi. Text of Part I,
B1-L2, in eights. Pages 1-148.

Part II: The same as the preceding edition.

II. Title, A1 (verso blank). Contents, A2-A3. Plate III, A4 (recto
blank). Text, B1-K8, in eights, L1-L4, and M1-M2 (verso blank). Pages
1-155, 74 misprinted 44.

Part IV: The same as the preceding edition, without the final Key.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Travels into several Remote Nations of the World.
1726. _8vo, four parts in two volumes, Spanish calf, gilt back, gilt
edges, by Riviere._

Another copy, on small paper, with portrait having the inscription
around the oval, and six maps.

Collation: The same as the preceding copy.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--(I.) Travels into several Remote Nations of the World.
In four parts. By Lemuel Gulliver, first a Surgeon, and then a Captain
of several Ships. Vol. I. London: Printed for Benj. Motte, at the
Middle Temple-Gate in Fleet-street. M,DCC,XXVI. (II.) Travels into
several Remote Nations of the World. By Captain Lemuel Gulliver. Vol.
II. Part III. A Voyage to Laputa, Balnibarbi, Glubbdubdribb, Luggnagg,
and Japan. Part IV. A Voyage to the Houyhnhnms. London: Printed for
Benjamin Motte, at the Middle-Temple-Gate. M DCC XXVI. _8vo, four parts
in two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back, doubled with green
morocco, gilt borders in the manner of Derome, green moire silk guards,
gilt edges, by A. Meyer._

Presumably the fourth edition. The pagination of the two parts in each
volume is continuous, and Plates II and VI, preceding Parts II and IV,
respectively, are both numbered Page I, as though made for the previous
editions, in which those parts have a separate pagination.

The title of Volume II follows line for line that of the edition No. I
preceding, with "Glubbdubdribb" spelled with two final "b's," but the
entire work is reset. As in the other two editions, Chapter VII of Part
III is misprinted V.

Portrait by Sturt and Sheppard, and six maps.

Collation: I. Title, A1 (verso blank). Contents, A2 recto. "The
Publisher to the Reader," A2 verso-A4. Pages i-viii. Title of Part I,
1726, A5 (verso blank). Contents, A6. Text of Part I, A7-K8, in eights.
Title of Part II, 1726, L1 (verso blank). [In this copy misbound after
Contents.] Contents, L2-L3. "Plate II, Part II, Page 1," L4 (recto
blank). Text of Part II, M1-Y1. Pages 1-148, four leaves, and 149-310;
68, 165, 168-169, 172-173, and 176-177 misprinted 66, 164, 167-168,
171-172, and 175-176; 178 and 179 reversed; 180, 213, 216-217 misprinted
179, 113, 116-117; 220-221, 224-225, and 228 misprinted 120-121,
124-125, and 128.

II. Title, A1 (verso blank). Contents, A2-A3. Plate III, A4 (verso
blank). Part III, B1-L5. Title of Part IV, M1 (verso blank). Contents,
M2-M4. Part IV, M5-Z8 and Aa1-Aa8 (verso blank). Pages 1-154, four
leaves, and 155-353.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--(I.) Travels into several Remote Nations of the World.
In Four Parts. By Lemuel Gulliver, First a Surgeon, and then a Captain
of several Ships. To which are prefix'd, Several Copies of Verses
Expla-planatory and Commendatory; never before printed. Vol. I. The
Second Edition. London: Printed for Benj. Motte, at the Middle Temple
Gate in Fleet-street. M DCC XXVII. (II.) Travels into several Remote
Nations of the World. By Captain Lemuel Gulliver. Part III. A Voyage to
Laputa, Balnibarbi, Glubbdubdrib, Luggnag and Japan. Part IV. A Voyage
to the Houyhnhnms. Vol. II. The Second Edition, Corrected. London:
Printed for Benjamin Motte, at the Middle-Temple-Gate. M DCC XX VII.
_8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Portrait of Gulliver by Sturt and Sheppard, and six maps.

The present copy contains two more leaves than the one in the British
Museum; viz., "The Words of the King of Brobdingnag," following b4.

This edition contains twelve leaves of preliminary matter not found in
previous editions.

Collation: I. Title, a1 (verso blank). "To Quinbus Flestrin the
Man-Mountain. An Ode. By Titly Tit, Esq; Poet Laureat to his Majesty
of Lilliput. Translated into English," a2-a3 "The Lamentation of
Glumdalclitch for the Loss of Grildrig. A Pastoral," in verse, a4-a6
recto. "To Mr. Lemuel Gulliver, The Grateful Address of the Unhappy
Houyhnhnms, now in Slavery and Bondage in England," a6 verso-a7. "Mary
Gulliver to Capt. Lemuel Gulliver; an Epistle," in verse, b1-b4. "The
Words of the King of Brobdingnag, As he held Captain Gulliver between
his Finger and Thumb for the Inspection of the Sages and Learned Men
of the Court," *1 and A1. Contents of Parts, A2 recto. "The Publisher to
the Reader," A2 verso-A4. Title of Part I, A5 recto. Contents of
Chapters, A5 verso-A6. Pages i-xii. Part I, A7-K8. Pages 1-148.

Title of Part II, L1 (verso blank). Contents, L2-L3. Part II, L4-U8,
X1-X4, and Y1. Pages 1-164. Y2 blank.

II. Advertisement, one leaf (recto blank). Title, A1 (verso blank).
Contents, A2-A3. Part III, B1-K8, L1-L4, and M1-M2 (verso blank). Pages
1-155.

Title of Part IV, A1 (verso blank). Contents, A2-A4. Part IV, B1-O4
(verso blank). Pages 1-199.


SWIFTIANA.--(I.) Travels into several Remote Nations of the World. By
Capt. Lemuel Gulliver. Vol. III. [Two lines in Latin] London: Printed in
the Year M.DCC.XX VII. (II.) Travels into several Remote Nations of the
World. By Captain Lemuel Gulliver. Vol. III. Part II. A Voyage to
Sevarambia, &c. London: Printed in the Year M DCC XX VII. _8vo, two
parts in one volume, red levant morocco, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

This volume was not written by Swift. Plate by R. Cooper after J. Van
der Gucht.

Collation: I. Half-title, A1 (verso blank). Title, A2 (verso blank).
Contents, A3-A4. Introduction, B1-C2, in eights. "A Second Voyage to
Brobdingnag," in six chapters, C3-I4. Pages 1-118; 110-111 repeated.

II. Title, A1 (verso blank). Contents, A2-A4 (verso blank). Part II, in
six chapters, B1-L8 (verso blank). Pages 1-159.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Voyages de Gulliver. A Paris, ches Gabriel Martin, . . .
MDCCXXVII. _8vo, two volumes, old red morocco, gilt edges, with the
arms of Madame du Barry and her device, "Boutez en avant."_

The first French translation, with four engravings.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Voyages de Gulliver. A Paris, dans la boutique de la
V. Coustelier, chez Jacques Guerin &c M.DCC.XXVII. _12mo, two volumes in
one, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Trautz-Bauzonnet._

Four copper-plate engravings.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Le Nouveau Gulliver, ov Voyage de Jean Gulliver, fils
du Capitaine Gulliver. Traduit d'un Manuscrit Anglois, par Monsieur L.
D. F. [l'Abbe Desfontaines] A Paris, chez La veuve Clouzier . . . et
Francois Le Breton &c MDCCXXX. _12mo, two volumes in one, green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Trautz-Bauzonnet._


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Voyages de Gulliver. A Paris, de l'Imprimerie de
Pierre Didot l'Aine An V. 1797. _12mo, two volumes bound in four parts,
green morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Derome._

Illustrated by ten exquisite engravings by Masquelier after the designs
of Le Febvre, each plate in two states, proofs before and after the
letters.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Voyages de Gulliver. 1797. _12mo, two volumes in four
parts, red morocco, gilt over uncut edges._

Large paper copy, with ten plates by Masquelier after the designs of
Lefebvre, proofs before the inscription.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Voyages de Gulliver dans des contrees lointaines par
Swift. Edition illustree par Grandville. Traduction nouvelle. Paris. H.
Fournier aine . . . MDCCCXXXVIII. _8vo, two volumes, half red morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Petit._


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Travels into several remote Nations of the World. By
Lemuel Gulliver, . . . Illustrated with upwards of four hundred
wood-engravings from designs by Grandville. With copious notes, a life
of the author, and an essay on satirical fiction, by W. C. Taylor, . . .
London: Hayward and Moore, . . . [1840] _8vo, half blue morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Voyages de Gulliver. A Paris   An MDCCCLX. _12mo, two
volumes (four parts), green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut
edges, by Allo._

Large paper copy, one hundred and fifty printed, with proof impression
of the eight plates by Masquelier after Lefebvre.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--. . . Travels into several remote Nations of the World
   by Lemuel Gulliver   first a surgeon and then a captain of several
ships   In Four Parts . . . By Jonathan Swift . . . With Five Etchings
and Portrait by Ad. Lalauze London J. C. Nimmo and Bain . . . 1882.
_8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 71 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with proof
etchings on Japan paper.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Travels into several remote Nations of the World   by
Lemuel Gulliver first a Surgeon, and then a Captain of several ships
with a preface by Henry Craik and one hundred illustrations by Charles
E. Brock   London   Macmillan and Co. . . . 1894 . . . _Royal 8vo,
buckram, uncut edges._

One of one hundred and ten large paper copies printed.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--. . . Voyages de Gulliver traduction nouvelle et
complete par B.-H. Gausseron [coloured vignette] Paris A. Quantin, . . .
[n. d.] _Royal 8vo, half red straight-grain morocco, figured red silk
sides, gilt top, uncut edges, with the original covers bound in, by The
Club Bindery._

No. 20 of one hundred copies printed on Japan paper.

Four full-page coloured plates by V. A. Poirson, numerous illustrations
in the text, head and tail pieces, and initials, almost all of them
coloured.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--The Life and Genuine Character of Doctor Swift.
Written by Himself. London: Printed for J. Roberts . . . 1733. . . .
_Folio, boards, by The Club Bindery._

A spurious copy of "Verses on the Death of Dr. Swift," 1731.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--(I.) Miscellanies. Consisting chiefly of original
pieces in prose and verse. By D--n S----t. Never before Published in
this Kingdom. Dublin   Printed. London: Re-printed for A. Moore in
Fleetstreet, 1734. (Price One Shilling.) (II.) A Proposal Humbly
offered to the P----t, For the more effectual preventing the further
Growth of Popery. With the Description and Use of the Ecclesiastical
Thermometer, very proper for all Families. [Two lines from Horace] By
Dr. S--t. To which is added, The Humble Petition of the Weavers and
Venders of Gold and Silver Lace, Embroiderers, &c. As also two poems,
viz. Helter Skelter, or the Hue and Cry after the Attornies upon their
riding the Circuit, and The Place of the Damn'd. The Second Edition.
Dublin Printed. London, Reprinted for J. Roberts . . . M DCC XXXII.
Price Six Pence. _8vo, two works in one volume, red morocco, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition of the Miscellanies. Contains no pages 49-50, although the
text is continuous.


SWIFT, ARBUTHNOT, POPE, AND GAY.--Miscellanies. . . . By Dr. Swift, Dr.
Arbuthnot, Mr. Pope, and Mr. Gay. The Fourth Edition Corrected: With
Several Additional Pieces in Verse and Prose. . . . London: Printed for
Charles Bathurst, . . . MDCCXLII. _8vo, four volumes, half red levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by R. W. Smith._

Large paper copy, with nine portraits, etc., inserted.

Volume I is by Swift; II, by Swift, Arbuthnot, and Gay; III, by
Arbuthnot, Pope, and Gay; and IV, by the four authors.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--(I.) An Epistle to a Lady, Who desired the Author to
make Verses on Her, in the heroick stile. Also a Poem, Occasion'd by
Reading Dr. Young's Satires, called, The Universal Passion. Dublin,
Printed: And Reprinted at London for J. Wilford, at the Three
Flower-de-Luces behind the Chapter-House, St. Paul's Church-Yard. M
DCC. XXX IV. [Price 1s. (II.) On Poetry: a rapsody. Printed at Dublin,
and Re-printed at London: And sold by J. Huggonson, next to Kent's
Coffee-House, near Serjeant's-Inn, in Chancery-Lane; and at the
Booksellers and Pamphlet-shops, 1733. [Price One Shilling.] _Folio,
two works in one volume, green levant morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First editions.

Collation: I. Title, one leaf (verso blank). Epistle, B1-E2 recto, in
twos. Poem, E2 verso-E3. Pages 1-18.

II. Title with ornament, one leaf (verso blank). Text, B1-H1, ending
with Errata, in twos. Pages 1-28.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--The Beasts Confession to the Priest, on Observing
how most Men mistake their own Talents. By J. S. D. S. P. Dublin,
Printed: London, Re-Printed: And Sold by T. Cooper, . . . 1738. _4to,
blue morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

A-C in fours, half-title on A1, and C4 blank.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--A Complete Collection Of Genteel and Ingenious
Conversation, According to the Most Polite Mode and Method Now used At
Court, and in the Best Companies of England. In three dialogues. By
Simon Wagstaff, Esq; London: Printed for B. Motte, and C. Bathurst, . . .
M.DCC.XXXVIII. _Royal 8vo, half brown levant morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Stikeman._

Large paper copy of the first edition.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Polite Conversation in three dialogues by Jonathan
Swift with introduction and notes by George Saintsbury   London . . .
Charles Whittingham & Co . . . MDCCCXCII. _Crown 8vo, half vellum, uncut
edges._

No. 26 of fifty copies printed on Japanese vellum, with portrait of
Swift.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--An Imitation of the Sixth Satire of the Second Book of
Horace. . . . The first Part done in the Year 1714, By Dr. Swift. The
latter Part now first added, And never before Printed. London:
Printed for B. Motte and C. Bathurst . . . and J. and P. Knapton . . . M
DCC XXXVIII. (Price one Shilling.) _Folio, cloth, by The Club Bindery._

Collation: Half-title, A1 (verso blank). Title, A2 (verso
Advertisement).

Second half-title, B1 recto. Text (Latin on the verso, English on the
recto), B1 verso-G2 (verso blank), in twos. Pages 1-23.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Political Tracts. . . . By the Author of Gulliver's
Travels. London, Printed for C. Davis . . . MDCCXXXVIII. _8vo, two
volumes, Cambridge panelled calf._

First edition.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Verses on the Death of Doctor Swift. Written by
Himself; November 1731. The Third Edition. London, Printed for C.
Bathurst, . . . MDCCXXXIX. _Folio, red levant morocco, by The Club
Bindery. Bound with ten other works._


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Reflexions on Courtship and Marriage: In two Letters
to a Friend. Wherein a practicable Plan is laid down for Obtaining and
Securing Conjugal Felicity. To which is annexed, a Letter to a very
young Lady on her Marriage. By Dr. Swift. Philadelphia, Printed.
Edinburgh, Reprinted, For William Gray junior MDCCL . . . _8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--The Works of Jonathan Swift, D.D. Dean of St.
Patrick's, Dublin; containing Additional Letters, Tracts, and Poems, not
hitherto published; with Notes, and a Life of the Author, by Sir Walter
Scott, Bart. Second Edition. Edinburgh: printed for Archibald Constable
and Co. . . . 1824. _8vo, nineteen volumes, tree calf, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._

Portrait by Lizars after Bindon.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--The Poetical Works of Jonathan Swift. London William
Pickering   1833. _Foolscap 8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Memoir by the Reverend John Mitford and a portrait of Swift.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Selections from the Prose Writings of Jonathan Swift
with a preface and notes by Stanley Lane-Poole. London Kegan Paul,
Trench & Co., . . . MDCCCLXXXIIII. _Crown 8vo, original covers, uncut
edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--Letters and Journals of Jonathan Swift selected and
edited with a commentary and notes by Stanley Lane-Poole   London
Kegan Paul, Trench & Co., . . . MDCCCLXXXV. _Crown 8vo, original covers,
uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--The Correspondence and Poems of Jonathan Swift. A
collection of proof sheets with editorial corrections, additions &c in
the handwriting of Sir Walter Scott and Henry Weber, Letters of Dean
Swift &c. _8vo, two volumes, half green morocco, uncut edges._

Fifty-five portraits and other plates inserted.


SWIFT, JONATHAN.--See Bramston, James. Jest Books, 1764. Pope Alexander
(Miscellanea, 1727. Miscellanies, 1727.) Sterne, Laurence, 1882.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--The Queen-Mother and Rosamond by Algernon
Charles Swinburne. London   Edward Moxon & Co . . . 1860. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Chastelard; a tragedy. By Algernon Charles
Swinburne. London: Edward Moxon & Co., . . . 1865. _Foolscap 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Atalanta in Calydon. A Tragedy. By
Algernon Charles Swinburne . . . London: Edward Moxon & Co . . . 1865.
_4to, brown levant morocco, gilt back, side borders in a floral design,
doubled with blue morocco, wide borders in floral design, figured rose
silk guards, gilt over uncut edges, by Mercier._

One of two editions of the same date, the other being an octavo.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Atalanta in Calydon. A Tragedy. By
Algernon Charles Swinburne . . . third edition. London: John Camden
Hotten . . . 1868. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Atalanta in Calydon: a tragedy. By
Algernon Charles Swinburne. William Morris, Kelmscott Press. 1894.
_Folio, vellum wrappers, uncut edges, with ties._

One of two hundred and fifty copies printed.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Atalanta in Calydon. 1894. _Folio, vellum
wrappers, uncut edges, with ties._

Printed upon vellum.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Cleopatra. By Algernon Charles Swinburne.
London: John Camden Hotten . . . 1866. _Small 8vo, original covers,
uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Poems and Ballads. By Algernon Charles
Swinburne. London: Edward Moxon & Co., . . . 1866. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Poems and Ballads   second series   by
Algernon Charles Swinburne. London. Chatto and Windus, . . . 1878.
_Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition of the second series, uniform with the original first
series.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Poems and Ballads. 1878. _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

Large paper copy of the first edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Poems and Ballads by Algernon Charles
Swinburne. A new edition. London Chatto and Windus . . . 1878. _Crown
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Poems and Ballads   third series   by
Algernon Charles Swinburne. London Chatto & Windus . . . 1889. _Crown
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Notes on Poems and Reviews. By Algernon
Charles Swinburne. . . . London: John Camden Hotten, . . . 1866. _8vo,
cloth._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--A Song of Italy. By Algernon Charles
Swinburne. London: John Camden Hotten . . . 1867. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--William Blake. A Critical Essay. By
Algernon Charles Swinburne. With illustrations from Blake's designs in
facsimile, coloured and plain. Second Edition. London: John Camden
Hotten, . . . 1868. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Songs before Sunrise. By Algernon Charles
Swinburne. London: F. S. Ellis . . . 1871. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Bothwell: a tragedy. By Algernon Charles
Swinburne. London: Chatto and Windus . . . 1874. _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--George Chapman a critical essay. By
Algernon Charles Swinburne. London: Chatto and Windus . . . 1875. _Crown
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Songs of Two Nations by Algernon Charles
Swinburne   I. A Song of Italy. II. Ode on the Proclamation of the
French Republic. III. Dirae. London   Chatto and Windus . . . 1875.
_Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Note of an English Republican on the
Muscovite Crusade. By Algernon Charles Swinburne. . . . London: Chatto &
Windus, . . . 1876. _8vo, paper wrappers._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES Erechtheus: a tragedy. By Algernon Charles
Swinburne. London: Chatto and Windus . . . 1876. _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Songs of the Springtides by Algernon
Charles Swinburne   London   Chatto and Windus . . . 1880. _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Studies in Song by Algernon Charles
Swinburne. London   Chatto & Windus . . . 1880. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Mary Stuart a tragedy by Algernon Charles
Swinburne. London   Chatto & Windus . . . 1881. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Tristram of Lyonesse and other poems by
Algernon Charles Swinburne. London   Chatto & Windus . . . 1882. _Crown
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Presentation copy from the author, with autograph
inscription.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--A Century of Roundels by Algernon Charles
Swinburne. London   Chatto & Windus . . . 1883. _Square 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Marino Faliero   a tragedy by Algernon
Charles Swinburne. London   Chatto & Windus . . . 1885. _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Locrine   a tragedy by Algernon Charles
Swinburne. London   Chatto & Windus . . . 1887. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--A Study of Ben Jonson by Algernon Charles
Swinburne. London   Chatto & Windus . . . 1889. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Astrophel and other poems by Algernon
Charles Swinburne. London   Chatto & Windus . . . 1894. _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. "Astrophel" first appeared in the _Pall Mall Magazine_,
Vol. I, No. 1, May, 1893.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--The Tale of Balen by Algernon Charles
Swinburne. London   Chatto & Windus . . . 1896. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--Rosamund, Queen of the Lombards   a
tragedy by Algernon Charles Swinburne. London   Chatto & Windus   1899.
_Crown 8vo, buckram, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES.--See Rossetti, William Michael.


SYLVESTER, PAUL.--See Lang, Andrew.


SYMONS, ARTHUR.--See Savoy, The.


SYMONDS, JOHN ADDINGTON.--The Renaissance. An Essay read in the Theatre,
Oxford, June 17, 1863, by John Addington Symonds, B. A. . . . Oxford
Henry Hammans   1863. _8vo, original paper wrappers, uncut edges._

First edition.


SYMONDS, JOHN ADDINGTON.--The Life of Benvenuto Cellini   newly
translated into English by John Addington Symonds   with engraved
portrait and eight etchings by F. Laguillermie also eighteen
reproductions of the works of the master . . . London   John C. Nimmo . . .
MDCCCLXXXVIII. _Royal 8vo, two volumes, original cloth, uncut
edges._

No. 43 of one hundred large paper copies printed, with proof impressions
of the plates on India paper.


SYMONDS, JOHN ADDINGTON.--See Gozzi, Count Carlo.


T. S. A.--Cocking and its Votaries (by S. A. T.) _8vo, brown morocco,
back and sides emblematically tooled, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Larkins._

Fifteen illustrations, some coloured, and an original invitation ticket
to a cock fight, dated 1832.


TAILFER, ANDERSON, AND DOUGLAS.--A True and Historical Narrative Of the
Colony of Georgia In America, From the first Settlement thereof until
this present Period: containing The most authentick Facts, Matters
and Transactions therein; together with His Majesty's Charter,
Representations of the People, Letters, &c. and A Dedication to his
Excellency General Oglethorpe.

     {Pat. Tailfer, M. D.
  By {Hugh Anderson, M. A.
     {Da. Douglas, and others,

Land-holders in Georgia, at present in Charles-Town in South-Carolina.
[Six lines from Horace] Charles-Town, South-Carolina: Printed by P.
Timothy, for the Authors, M. DCC. XLI. _8vo, brown morocco, gilt back,
side corners, gilt top, uncut edges._


TALES FROM THE ARABIC.--See Payne, John.


TALFOURD, SIR THOMAS NOON.--Ion; a tragedy, in five acts. By Thomas Noon
Talfourd. London: Edward Moxon, . . . 1836. _8vo, half cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition. Autograph notice by the author inserted.


TALFOURD, SIR THOMAS NOON.--Final Memorials of Charles Lamb; consisting
chiefly of his letters not before published, with sketches of some of
his companions. By Thomas Noon Talfourd, one of his executors. . . .
London: Edward Moxon, . . . 1848. _12mo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition: dedicated to Wordsworth.


TALFOURD, SIR THOMAS NOON.--The Dramatic Works of Sir Thomas Noon
Talfourd, D.C.L. Eleventh edition; to which are added, a few sonnets and
verses. London: Edward Moxon, . . . 1852. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


TALFOURD, SIR THOMAS NOON.--Recollections of a First Visit to the Alps,
in August and September 1841. By T. N. Talfourd. London: printed for
private circulation [n. d.] _16mo, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bedford._

Presentation copy to "Mr. Justice Creswell with the best respects of T.
N. Talfourd," with autograph inscription and corrections. A very few
copies were printed.


TASSO, TORQUATO.--Jerusalem Delivered; an heroic poem. Translated from
the Italian of Torquato Tasso, by John Hoole . . . The eighth edition,
with notes. London: printed by T. Bensley . . . 1803. _Royal 8vo, two
volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Rousselle._

Large paper copy, with portrait and fourteen plates engraved by Fittler,
Heath, Anker Smith, Neagle, etc., after the designs of S. Shelley.

Contains a Life of Tasso and a Dedication to the Queen, the latter
written by Samuel Johnson, though signed by Hoole.


TASSO, TORQUATO.--Jerusalem Delivered. 1803. _Royal 8vo, two volumes,
green morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges._

Another large paper copy. Inserted are the original water-colour
drawings for the engravings, also three unpublished drawings by Shelley.


TATLER, The.--See British Classics and British Essayists.


TAVERNER, WILLIAM.--The Faithful Bride of Granada. A Play. As it is
Acted at the Theatre Royal In Drury-lane, By Her Majesty's Servants.
London, Printed for James Knapton, . . . William Turner, . . . William
Davis, . . . and Bernard Lintott, . . . 1704. Price 1s. 6d. _4to, purple
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A-I2 in fours, half-title on A1, title on A2.


TAVERNER, WILLIAM.--The Maid the Mistress. A Comedy. As it is Acted
at the Theatre Royal, by Her Majesty's Servants. London: Printed for E.
Sanger at the Post-House at the middle Temple-Gate; and E. Curll at
the Peacock without Temple-Bar. 1708. _4to, green levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A-I3 in fours, half-title on A1, title on A2, final leaf
of advertisement, I4.


TAYLOR, SIR HENRY.--The Eve of the Conquest, and other poems. By Henry
Taylor . . . London: Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXLVII. _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


TAYLOR, SIR HENRY.--Notes from Books. in four essays. By Henry Taylor.
London: John Murray . . . 1849. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TAYLOR, SIR HENRY.--Notes from Life in six essays . . . By Henry Taylor
. . . Third edition. London: John Murray . . . 1849. _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


TAYLOR, SIR HENRY.--Edwin the Fair; an historical drama. Isaac Comnenus;
a play. The Eve of the Conquest, and other poems. By Henry Taylor, . . .
Third edition. London: Edward Moxon. . . . 1852. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


TAYLOR, SIR HENRY.--Philip van Artevelde; a dramatic romance. In two
parts. By Henry Taylor. . . . Sixth edition. London: Edward Moxon, . . .
1852. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


TAYLOR, ISAAC.--History of the Transmission of Ancient Books to Modern
Times; or, a concise account of the means by which the genuineness and
authenticity of ancient historical works are ascertained: with an
estimate of the comparative value of the evidence usually adduced in
support of the claims of the jewish and christian scriptures. By Isaac
Taylor. London: Printed for B. J. Holdsworth, . . . 1827. _8vo, boards,
uncut edges._

First edition.


TAYLOR, ISAAC.--The Process of Historical Proof; exemplified and
explained: with observations on the peculiar points of the Christian
evidence. By Isaac Taylor. . . . London: printed for B. J. Holdsworth,
. . . 1828. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

First edition.


TAYLOR, ISAAC.--Saturday Evening. By the Author of Natural History of
Enthusiasm. . . . London: Holdsworth and Ball. M DCCC XXXII. _8vo, half
green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


TAYLOR, ISAAC.--Fanaticism. By the Author of Natural History of
Enthusiasm. . . . London: Holdsworth and Ball, . . . M DCCC XXXIII.
_8vo, half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


TAYLOR, ISAAC.--Spiritual Despotism. By the Author of Natural History of
Enthusiasm. . . . London: Holdsworth and Ball, . . . M DCCC XXXV. _8vo,
half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


TAYLOR, ISAAC.--Physical Theory of Another Life by the author of Natural
History of Enthusiasm . . . London   William Pickering   1836. _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TAYLOR, ISAAC.--Elements of Thought; or concise explanations
(alphabetically arranged) of the principal terms employed in the several
branches of Intellectual Philosophy. By Isaac Taylor. . . . Fifth
thousand. London. S. Holdsworth, . . . 1841. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


TAYLOR, JOHN.--The Music Speech at the Public Commencement in Cambridge,
July 6, M DCC XXX. To which is added, An Ode designed to have been
set to Music on that Occasion. By John Taylor, M.A. Fellow of St.
John's College. London, Printed by William Bowyer, Jun. Sometime Student
of the same College; And sold by W. Thurlbourn in Cambridge, R.
Clements in Oxford, and the Booksellers of London and Westminster.
M DCC XXX. _8vo, paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._

Contains half-title and final leaf of advertisements.


TAYLOR, SAMUEL.--Angling in all its branches, reduced to a complete
science: being the result of more than forty years real practice and
strict observation throughout the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland.
In three parts. First, Describing (among other things) the Counties
of England, Wales, and Scotland, in alphabetical order; . . . Secondly,
A full description of the different kinds of Fish taken by Angling,
&c. . . . Thirdly, A list of Artificial Flies . . . The Whole forming
a Work of real Utility, . . . By Samuel Taylor, Gent. London: Printed
by A. Strahan . . . for T. N. Longman and O. Rees . . . 1800. _8vo, half
brown levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by Krafft._

First edition.


TAYLOR, THOMAS, _translator_.--Iamblicus on the Mysteries of the
Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Assyrians. Translated from the Greek by Thomas
Taylor. Chiswick: printed by C. Whittingham . . . 1821. _8vo, russia,
back and sides gilt and blind tooled, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Yarrell._

A small edition printed for the translator, and for the most part
suppressed.


TAYLOR, THOMAS, _translator_.--Ocellus Lucanus on the Nature of the
Universe. Taurus, the Platonic Philosopher, on the Eternity of the
World. Julius Firmicus Maternus of the Thema Mundi; in which the
positions of the stars at the commencement of the several mundane
periods is given. Select Theorems on the Perpetuity of Time, by Proclus.
Translated from the originals by Thomas Taylor. London: printed for the
translator; and sold by John Bohn, . . . MDCCCXXXI. _8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


TAYLOR, THOMAS.--Aristotle. Volume X. 1812.


TAYLOR, TOM.--Life of Benjamin Robert Haydon, Historical Painter, from
his autobiography and journals. Edited and compiled by Tom Taylor, . . .
Second edition.--London: Longman, Brown &c . . . 1853. _Post 8vo, three
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


TAYLOR, TOM.--See Foster, Birket. Leslie, C.R.


TAYLOR, W. B. S.--The Origin, Progress, and present Condition of the
Fine Arts in Great Britain and Ireland. By W. B. Sarsfield Taylor, . . .
[vignette] . . . London: Whittaker & Co. . . . 1841. _Crown 8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Woodcuts.


TENNYSON, ALFRED AND CHARLES.--Poems, by Two Brothers . . . London:
printed for W. Simpkin and R. Marshall, . . . and J. and J. Jackson,
Louth. MDCCCXXVII. _Small 8vo, green levant morocco, back and sides
covered with an exquisite floral design, blossoms and seed-pods,
gauffred gilt edges, by Cobden-Sanderson, 1890._

First edition of Tennyson's first publication.


TENNYSON, ALFRED AND CHARLES.--Poems by Two Brothers . . . London
Macmillan and Co. . . . 1893. _Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 250 of three hundred large paper copies printed.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Prolusiones Academicae praemis annius dignatae et
in curia Cantabrigiensi recitatae comitiis maximis A. D.   M. DCCC. XXIX.
Cantabrigiae: typis academicis excudit Joannes Smith [1829] _8vo, blue
levant morocco, gilt back, uncut edges, with the original covers, by
Riviere._

Includes the first edition of "Timbuctoo," a Poem which obtained the
Chancellor's medal at the Cambridge commencement, "by A. Tennyson of
Trinity College."


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Poems, chiefly lyrical, by Alfred Tennyson.
London: Effingham Wilson, . . . 1830. _12mo, citron levant morocco, gilt
back, side panel, doubled with green levant ornamented with sprays of
roses, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Poems by Alfred Tennyson. London: Edward Moxon,
. . . MDCCCXXXIII. _Small 8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt back, rose
vine panel on the sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--The Princess; a medley. By Alfred Tennyson.
London: Edward Moxon . . . MDCCCXLVII. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--The Princess a medley by Alfred Tennyson.
London C. Kegan Paul & Co., . . . MDCCCLXXX. _Crown 8vo, original
covers, uncut edges._

One of fifty large paper copies printed, with frontispiece on India
paper.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--The Princess a Medley by Alfred Tennyson.
London   Kegan Paul, Trench & C^{o} MDCCCLXXXII. _Post 8vo, brown levant
morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Frontispiece.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--In Memoriam. London: Edward Moxon . . . 1850.
_Post 8vo, light brown levant morocco, back and sides covered with
mosaic of red and green in small compartments, gilt edges, in a blue
levant morocco case, by Riviere._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--In Memoriam   Boston   Ticknor and Fields
1861. _Small 8vo, red morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Matthews._

Portrait of Tennyson, a proof, inserted.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--In Memoriam   London   Kegan Paul & Co   M DCCC
LXXX. _Post 8vo, brown levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Etched portrait of the author.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--In Memoriam. London   Macmillan and Co. 1885.
_8vo, green levant morocco, back and sides covered with a floral
design, partly studded, leaf inside border and edges similarly gauffred,
by Cobden-Sanderson, 1887._

One of five hundred large paper copies printed, with autograph letter of
the binder inserted.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Maud, and other poems. By Alfred Tennyson . . .
London: Edward Moxon . . . 1855. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition, with autograph letter of the author inserted.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Maud 1855. _Post 8vo, crimson levant morocco,
back and sides richly tooled with roses and leaves, gauffred gilt edges,
by Cobden-Sanderson, 1890._

Another copy of the first edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Maud, a mono-drama, by Alfred Lord Tennyson.
Printed by William Morris at the Kelmscott Press, . . . 1893. Published
by Macmillan & Co., . . . _Crown 8vo, calf, front cover chiselled in a
lyre and laurel design, figured silk linings, gilt over uncut edges by
Gruel._


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Poems by Alfred Tennyson, D. C. L., Poet
Laureate. London: Edward Moxon, . . . 1857. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait by H. Robinson, after a medallion by Thomas Woolner, and
fifty-four woodcuts by W. J. Linton, the Dalziel brothers, T. Williams,
J. Thompson and W. T. Green, after Stanfield, Millais, Hunt, Rossetti,
Mulready, Maclise, Horsley, and Creswick.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Idylls of the King. By Alfred Tennyson . . .
London: Edward Moxon & Co., . . . 1859. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Poems. MDCCCXXX. MDCCCXXXIII. Privately
Printed [Canada] 1862. _Small 8vo, original paper covers, uncut edges._

Privately printed for J. Dyke Campbell, by whom the book was edited.
Presentation copy.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Enoch Arden, etc. By Alfred Tennyson . . .
London: Edward Moxon & Co., . . . 1864. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Enoch Arden. By Alfred Tennyson, [vignette]
Boston: J. E. Tilton and Company. 1865. _4to, half green straight-grain
morocco, uncut edges._

Six full-page woodcuts, and eighteen vignettes, including the one on the
title-page.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Enoch Arden. By Alfred Tennyson: Illustrated by
Arthur Hughes. London: Edward Moxon & Co. . . . 1866. _4to, green
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges, by Suttaby._

Portrait and twenty-five vignettes.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Poems by Alfred Tennyson, D.C.L. Poet Laureate.
With illustrations by Millais, Stanfield, Creswick, Mulready, Horsley
etc etc. New edition. London: E. Moxon and Co. . . . 1866. _4to, red
levant morocco, back and sides richly tooled, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Portrait of Tennyson on steel from Woolner's medallion, and fifty-four
woodcuts.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Poems by Alfred Tennyson. Strahan and Co., . . .
London   1869. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--The Holy Grail And other Poems By Alfred
Tennyson . . . Strahan and Co., . . . London 1870. _Post 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Gareth and Lynette etc. By Alfred Tennyson . . .
Strahan & Co . . . London   1872. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Queen Mary a drama by Alfred Tennyson. Henry S.
King & Co., London 1875. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Harold a drama by Alfred Tennyson. Henry S.
King & Co.; London 1877. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--The Lover's Tale by Alfred Tennyson. London
C. Kegan Paul & Co., . . . 1879. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Ballads and other Poems by Alfred Tennyson.
London   C. Kegan Paul & Co., . . . 1880. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--The Lady of Shalott   Decorated by Howard Pyle
   Dodd Mead & Company   New York   1881. _4to, maroon levant morocco,
gilt and blind tooled back and side panels, doubled with green morocco,
gilt borders, green moire silk guards, gilt edges, by Lortic._

Nineteen pages of text with duplicates on satin, and forty-five designs
in colour, with duplicates on satin, and the original drawings.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Poems by Alfred Tennyson   London   Kegan Paul,
Trench & Co., . . . [Chiswick Press] MDCCCLXXXIII. _Crown 8vo, two
volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bradstreet's._

No. 48 of fifty large paper copies printed, with frontispieces.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--The Cup and The Falcon by Alfred Lord Tennyson
. . . London Macmillan and Co. . . . 1884. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Tiresias and other poems by Alfred Lord
Tennyson . . . London Macmillan and Co. 1885. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition, with the dedication afterwards suppressed.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Becket by Alfred Lord Tennyson . . . London
Macmillan and Co. 1885. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Locksley Hall Sixty Years After etc. By Alfred
Lord Tennyson . . . London Macmillan and Co . . . 1886. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition, with dedication to the poet's wife, afterwards
suppressed.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Demeter and other poems by Alfred Lord Tennyson
. . . London Macmillan and Co . . . 1889. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--The Foresters Robin Hood and Maid Marian by
Alfred Lord Tennyson . . . London Macmillan and Co., . . . 1892. _Post
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--The Death of OEnone, Akbar's Dream, and other
poems by Alfred Lord Tennyson . . . with five steel portraits of the
author. London Macmillan and Co., . . . 1892. _Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition. Large paper copy, five hundred printed, with proofs of
the portraits on India paper.


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.--Alfred Lord Tennyson   A Memoir by his Son . . .
New York   The Macmillan Company . . . 1898 . . . _8vo, two volumes,
cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Twenty-four portraits and other illustrations.


TESTAMENT.--The New Testament of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. With
engravings on wood from designs of Fra Angelico, Pietro Perugino,
Francesco Francia, Lorenzo di Credi, Fra Bartolommeo, Titian, Raphael,
Gaudenzio Ferrari, Daniel di Volterra and others. London: Longman . . .
1864. _4to, blue levant morocco, back and sides richly tooled, gilt
edges, by Bedford._

Large paper copy, two hundred and fifty printed.


THACKERAY, WILLIAM MAKEPEACE.--The Paris Sketch Book: by Mr. Titmarsh.
with numerous designs by the author, on copper and wood. London: John
Macrone . . . 1840. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, with the original cloth covers inserted, by Riviere._

First edition of Thackeray's first book.


THACKERAY, WILLIAM MAKEPEACE.--The Irish Sketch-Book. By Mr. M. A.
Titmarsh. With numerous engravings on wood, drawn by the author. London:
Chapman and Hall . . . MDCCCXLIII. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


THACKERAY, WILLIAM MAKEPEACE.--The History of Pendennis. His fortunes
and misfortunes, his friends and his greatest enemy. By William
Makepeace Thackeray. With illustrations on steel and wood by the Author.
London: Bradbury and Evans, . . . 1849. _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Tout._

First edition.


THACKERAY, WILLIAM MAKEPEACE.--The History of Henry Esmond, Esq. A
Colonel in the service of her Majesty Queen Anne. Written by himself.
London: Printed for Smith, Elder & Company 1853. _Crown 8vo, three
volumes, calf, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Tout._


THACKERAY, WILLIAM MAKEPEACE.--The Newcomes. Memoirs of a most
respectable Family. Edited by Arthur Pendennis Esq. with illustrations
on steel [46] and wood, by Richard Doyle. London: Bradbury and Evans, . . .
1854. _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Tout._

First edition.


THACKERAY, WILLIAM MAKEPEACE.--The Virginians. A Tale of the last
century. By W. M. Thackeray . . . with illustrations on steel [46] and
wood, by the author. London: Bradbury and Evans . . . 1858. _8vo, two
volumes, calf, gilt back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Tout._

First edition, with the original covers, etc., bound at the end.


THACKERAY, WILLIAM MAKEPEACE.--The Works of William Makepeace Thackeray
. . . London: Smith, Elder & Co., . . . 1869. _8vo, twenty-two volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

First issue, with individual titles dated 1867-8-9, and the original
illustrations.


THACKERAY, WILLIAM MAKEPEACE.--Loose Sketches. An Eastern Adventure,
etc. By W. M. Thackeray. With a frontispiece by John Leech. London:
Frank T. Sabin . . . MDCCCXCIV. _8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed.


THAUSING, MORIZ.--Albert Duerer His Life and Works. By Moriz Thausing, . . .
Translated from the German. Edited by Fred. A. Eaton, . . . with
portraits and illustrations. London: John Murray, . . . 1862. _8vo, two
volumes, green levant morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Bradstreet's._

Augmented by the insertion of a complete set of the plates called the
"Little Passion," together with the original text printed at Venice,
1612, by Daniel Bissuccio.


THEOBALD, LEWIS.--The Persian Princess: or, the Royal Villain. A
Tragedy. As it was Acted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-lane. By Mr.
Theobald. . . . London: Printed for Jonas Browne, . . . 1717. _4to,
brown morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


THEOBALD, LEWIS.--The Fatal Secret. A Tragedy. As it is Acted at the
Theatre-Royal, in Covent-Garden. By Mr. Theobald. London: printed for J.
Watts . . . MDCCXXXV. _12mo, contemporary red morocco, gilt back, sides
tooled with radiating centre and corners, gilt edges._

First edition. Frontispiece by G. Van der Gucht. Dedicated to Sir Robert
Walpole, and containing Horace Walpole's book-plate.


THOMAS, ISAIAH.--The History of Printing in America, with a Biography of
Printers, and an Account of Newspapers. To which is prefixed a concise
view of the discovery and progress of the art in other parts of the
world . . . By Isaiah Thomas . . . Worcester: Isaiah Thomas Jun . . .
1810. _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Bedford._

Five plates of facsimiles, etc. Autograph letter of Thomas inserted.


THOMAS, RALPH.--A Catalogue of the Etchings and Drypoints of James
Abbott Macneil Whistler. London: privately printed by John Russell
Smith, . . . 1874. _8vo, original cloth, uncut edges._

Fifty copies printed, with etched portrait of Whistler.


THOMPSON, ISAAC.--A Collection of Poems, Occasionally Writ On Several
Subjects. By Isaac Thompson . . . Newcastle upon Tyne: Printed by John
White, . . . 1731. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

Thick paper copy, with list of subscribers, eight pages, at the end.


THOMS, P. P.--A Dissertation on the Ancient Chinese Vases of the Shang
Dynasty, from 1743 to 1496, B.C.. Illustrated with Forty-two Chinese
Wood Engravings. By P. P. Thoms, . . . London: published by the author,
. . . and Sold by James Gilbert, . . . 1851. _8vo, cloth._


THOMS, W. J.--[Notes on Editions of the Dunciad] [n.d.] _12mo, half
green morocco._

Privately reprinted from "Notes and Queries," Nos. 268-270, without
title-page and interleaved.


THOMS, W. J.--Curll Papers stray notes on the life and publications of
Edmund Curll   From Notes and Queries   Reprinted for private
circulation [London, by Spottiswoode and Co.] M DCCC LXXIX. _12mo, half
green morocco, gilt top, with the original covers bound in._

Presentation copy from the author to Lieut.-Colonel Francis Grant, with
inscription on the half-title.


THOMSON, ARTHUR.--A Handbook of Anatomy for Art Students by Arthur
Thomson, . . . With numerous illustrations   New York   The Macmillan
Company   1896. _8vo, buckram, gilt top, uncut edges._

Twenty-nine plates and illustrations in the text.


THOMSON, JAMES.--The Tragedy of Sophonisba. Acted at the Theatre-Royal
in Drury-Lane By His Majesty's Servants. By Mr. Thomson. London: Printed
for A. Millar . . . MDCCXXX. _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
edges, by Bedford._

Thick paper copy of the first edition.

A-L in fours, title on A1. Dedicated to the Queen.


THOMSON, JAMES.--The Castle of Indolence: an Allegorical Poem. Written
in Imitation of Spenser. By James Thomson. London: Printed for A.
Millar, . . . MDCCXLVIII. _4to, red morocco, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition.


THOMSON, JAMES.--Les Saisons. Poeme. Traduit de l'Anglois de Thompson. A
Paris, chez Chaubert [et] Herissant . . . 1769. _8vo, green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Motte._

Engraved title, four plates and four vignettes by Baquoy after the
designs of Eisen, all brilliant impressions.


THOMSON, JAMES.--The Seasons. By James Thomson. Parma   printed by
Bodoni   MDCCXCIV. _Folio, half maroon calf, uncut edges._

The entire edition consisted of one hundred and seventy-five copies.

The present copy is one of a few printed upon large paper.


THOMSON, JAMES.--Les Saisons, Poeme. Traduit de l'Anglais de Thompson
[par Mme. Bontemps] Edition ornee de Figures dessinees par Le Barbier et
gravees sous sa direction. A Paris, de l'Imprimerie de Didot Jeune
M.DCC.XCVI. _Royal 8vo, red morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt
edges._

Three hundred copies printed. The four plates are proofs before the
inscription.


THOMSON, JAMES.--The Seasons, by James Thomson. A New Edition. Adorned
with plates. London: printed by T. Bensley . . . for T. J. Du Roveray . . .
1802. _Royal 8vo, half crown morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Cook._

Large paper copy.

Portrait by Collyer after Burney, and six proof plates by Bromley,
Heath, etc., after designs by Fuseli and Hamilton.


THOMSON, JAMES.--The Seasons. 1802. _Royal 8vo, green levant morocco,
back and sides covered with a floral and foliage design, figured green
silk linings, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

Large paper copy, with the original plates in proof state, some in
duplicate. Inserted are a portrait by R. Hicks after Aikman, on India
paper, and thirteen proof plates after Stothard, Kirk, etc., and
Stothard's original drawing for Autumn, the plate of which is in three
states.


THOMSON, JAMES.--The Seasons. 1802. _Royal 8vo, green morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Clarke and Bedford._

One of three copies, printed on large and heavy India paper.

Portrait and six plates, proofs before letters.


THOMSON, JAMES.--The Seasons, by J. Thomson. Embellished with engravings
on wood   By Bewick, from Thurston's Designs . . . London: printed for
James Wallis . . . 1805. _8vo, half brown levant morocco, Janseniste,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Krafft._


THOMSON, JAMES.--The Seasons. By James Thomson. With engraved
illustrations from designs drawn on wood by John Bell . . . [&c] and
with the Life of the Author by Patrick Murdock . . . Edited by Bolton
Corney Esq. London: Longman . . . 1842. _4to, blue levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by Lortic._

Seventy-seven illustrations.


THOMSON, JAMES.--The Works of James Thomson. With his last corrections
and improvements . . . To which is prefixed the Life of the Author by
Patrick Murdock . . . London: printed by A. Strahan . . . M D
CCLXXXVIII. _Crown 8vo, three volumes bound in four, blue levant
morocco, gilt back and side borders, Roger Payne style, inside border,
silk linings, gilt over uncut edges, by Riviere._

Illustrated by the insertion of one hundred and eighty engravings on
copper and steel, including twenty-five portraits of the author, with
the head engraved by Caroline Watson and others in two states, proofs
before and after the letters. Nearly all the various series of plates to
the "Seasons," etc., are included, many in from two to four states, and
the engraving by Audinet after Stothard, of "Shepherding," is
supplemented by the original drawing.


THOMSON, JAMES.--The Works of Mr. James Thomson, with his last
corrections and improvements . . . to which is prefixed, the Life of the
Author, by Patrick Murdock . . . London: printed for R. Baldwin . . .
1802. _Royal 8vo, three volumes, red levant morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Large paper copy. Illustrated by a portrait of the author, and
twenty-two plates (many inserted) after the designs of Stothard, Metz,
Fuseli, Burney, Westall, etc., many proofs.


THOMSON, JAMES.--The Poetical Works of James Thomson. London   William
Pickering   1830. _Foolscap, 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Memoir by Sir Harris Nicolas, and a portrait of Thomson.


THOMSON, JAMES.--See Mallet, David.


THOMSON, RICHARD.--A Lecture on some of the characteristic features of
Illuminated Manuscripts, from the VIII. to the XVIII. century; by
Richard Thomson . . . as delivered . . . by William Tite . . . to which
is added A Second Lecture on the materials and practice of Illuminators:
with biographical and literary notices illustrative of the Art of
Illumination. London. M.DCCC.LVII. [not published] _8vo, cloth._


THOMSON, WILLIAM.--An Outline of the Necessary Laws of Thought; a
treatise on pure and applied logic. By William Thomson, . . . Third
edition much enlarged. London: William Pickering. . . . 1853. _Post 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


THORBURN, GRANT.--Fifty Years' Reminiscences of New-York, or Flowers
from the Garden of Laurie Todd: being a collection of fugitive pieces
which appeared in the newspapers and periodicals of the day, for the
last thirty years; including tales of the sugar-house [prison] in
Liberty Street; &c . . . By Grant Thorburn. New York: published by
Daniel Fanshaw, . . . [1845] _12mo, half maroon straight-grain morocco,
gilt back, gilt top._

Portrait by J. N. Gimbrede after Freeman.


THORBURN, GRANT.--Lawrie Todd. Life and Writings of Grant Thorburn:
prepared by himself. New York: Edward Walker, . . . 1852. _12mo,
original green morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges._

Portrait by J. N. Gimbrede after Freeman.


THORNBURY, WALTER.--The Life of J. M. W. Turner, R.A. founded on Letters
and Papers. furnished by his friends and fellow academicians. By Walter
Thornbury . . . London: Hurst and Blackett . . . 1862. _8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait (statue) and six woodcut illustrations.


THORNBURY, WALTER.--The Life of J. M. W. Turner, R.A. founded on letters
and papers furnished by his friends and fellow-academicians by Walter
Thornbury   A new edition revised and mostly rewritten with
illustrations, facsimiled in colours, from Turner's original drawings.
London   Chatto & Windus, . . . 1877 . . . _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


THOUSAND NIGHTS.--See Payne, John.


THRUPP, J. GODFREY.--See James and Thrupp.


TICKNOR, GEORGE.--History of Spanish Literature. By George Ticknor.
London: John Murray   . . . 1849. _8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


TICKNOR, GEORGE.--History of Spanish Literature by George Ticknor . . .
Third American edition, corrected and enlarged. Boston   Ticknor and
Fields   1866. _8vo, three volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed.


TICKNOR, GEORGE.--Life of William Hickling Prescott by George Ticknor.
Boston, Ticknor and Fields   1864. _4to, blue morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

One of two editions published in the same year, the other being octavo.
Portrait of Prescott.


TICKNOR, GEORGE.--Life of William Hickling Prescott. By George Ticknor,
. . . With a new portrait, on steel. London: Routledge, Warne, and
Routledge, . . . 1864. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First English edition.


TICKNOR, GEORGE.--Life of William Hickling Prescott by George Ticknor
[arms] Boston   Ticknor and Fields 1866. _Royal 4to, cloth, uncut
edges._

No. 14 of one hundred large paper copies printed.

Two portraits, proofs before letters, facsimile, and sixteen woodcuts in
the text.


TIECK, LUDWIG.--The Midsummer Night. or Shakespeare and the Fairies.
From the German of Ludwig Tieck. By Mary C. Rumsey. London: printed by
C. Whittingham. 1854. _4to, boards, uncut edges._


TIFFIN, WALTER F.--Gossip about Portraits. Principally Engraved
Portraits. By Walter F. Tiffin. London: H. G. Bohn . . . 1866. _Post
8vo, boards, uncut edges._

First issue.


TIGHE, MARY BLACHFORD.--Psyche; or, the Legend of Love. [Printed for
James Carpenter by C. W. Whittingham] London   1805. _Post 8vo, boards,
uncut edges._

Large paper copy, one hundred printed for presents, with a portrait of
Mrs. Tighe, engraved by Caroline Watson. Presentation copy to Lady
Elinor Butler and S. Ponsonby, with inscription by the author.

One of the earliest imprints of the elder Charles Whittingham.


TIGHE, MARY BLACHFORD.--Psyche, with other Poems. By the late Mrs. Henry
Tighe. The Fourth Edition. London: printed for Longman, . . . 1812.
_Small 8vo, green levant morocco, profusely ornamented on back and
sides, and inlaid with citron morocco, wide inside borders, repeated on
the yellow silk linings, gilt edges with a painting on the fore-edge, by
a contemporary English binder._

Portrait by Scriven after Romney.


TIMBS, JOHN.--Club Life of London, with Anecdotes of the Clubs,
Coffee-Houses, and Taverns of the Metropolis during the 17th, 18th, and
19th, Centuries. By John Timbs . . . London: Richard Bentley . . .
1856. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portraits of George Colman and Captain Morris.


TIMBS, JOHN.--Romance of London: strange stories, scenes and remarkable
persons of the great town. By John Timbs, . . . London: Richard Bentley,
. . . 1865. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TIMBS, JOHN.--English Eccentrics and Eccentricities. By John Timbs, . . .
London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1866. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


TIMBS, JOHN.--London and Westminster: City and Suburb. Strange Events,
Characteristics and Changes, of Metropolitan Life. By John Timbs . . .
London: Richard Bentley . . . 1868. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth,
uncut edges._


TIMBS, JOHN.--Curiosities of London: exhibiting the most rare and
remarkable objects of interest in the metropolis; with nearly Sixty
Years' Personal Recollections. By John Timbs . . . A new edition,
corrected and enlarged   London: Longmans . . . M DCCCLXVIII. _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Timbs, engraved by Mote.


TITE, SIR WILLIAM.--An Address delivered before the Society of
Antiquaries of London, on Thursday, December 12th. 1861, at an
exhibition of Early Printed Books. To which is subjoined An Address
delivered on Thursday, June 6th, 1861, at an exhibition of Illuminated
Manuscripts. By William Tite, . . . London: M.DCCC.LXII. [not published]
_8vo, half olive morocco, uncut edges._

Presentation copy to Dr. Markland, with the author's inscription.


"TODD, LAURIE."--See Thorburn, Grant.


TOM RAW, THE GRIFFIN.--See D'Oyly, Sir Charles.


TONTY, HENRI DE.--Relation of Henri de Tonty Concerning the Explorations
of La Salle from 1678 to 1683 translated by Melville B. Anderson Chicago
The Caxton Club 1898. _8vo, half vellum, uncut edges._

One of one hundred and ninety-four copies printed on hand-made paper.


TOOVEY, JAMES.--A Catalogue of an extensive and extraordinary assemblage
of the productions of the Aldine Press, from its first establishment at
Venice in 1494, together with Lyonese and Venetian counterfeits, the
Giunta and other works illustrative of the series. London: James Toovey,
. . . [Chiswick Press] 1880. _8vo, half brown morocco, uncut edges._


TOWER MENAGERIE.--The Tower Menagerie: comprising the natural history of
the animals contained in that establishment; with Anecdotes of their
Characters and History. Illustrated by portraits of each, taken from
life, by William Harvey; and engraved on wood by Branston and Wright.
[vignette] London: printed for Robert Jennings, [by Charles Whittingham]
. . . M D CCC XXIX. _8vo, half blue silk, gilt top, uncut edges._

Printed on India paper.


TOWNSEND, W. H.--A System of Foliage, with hints on the acquirement of a
touch, being an introduction to the study of nature, designed for the
use of amateurs. By W. H. Townsend. London:--published by Joseph Graham,
. . . [1843] _Oblong 4to, cloth._

Twenty-three plates.


TOWNSHEND, THOMAS.--Poems. By Thomas Townshend . . . London: printed by
T. Bensley . . . 1796. _Royal 8vo, half green levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Allo._

Large paper copy, with vignettes by Stothard.


TRELAWNY, EDWARD JOHN.--Recollections of the Last Days of Shelley and
Byron. By E. J. Trelawny. London: Edward Moxon . . . 1858. _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

Four portraits and views.


TRENCH, RICHARD CHEVENIX.--The Hulsean Lectures for M. DCCC. XLV and M.
DCCC. XLVI. By Richard Chevenix Trench, . . . Fourth edition, revised.
Cambridge: Macmillan and Co. . . . 1859. . . . _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut
edges._


TREVELYAN, SIR GEORGE OTTO.--The Life and Letters of Lord Macaulay by
his nephew George Otto Trevelyan, M. P. . . . London Longmans, Green,
and Co   1876. _8vo, two volumes, original cloth, uncut edges._

First edition, with portrait of Macaulay.


TREVELYAN, SIR GEORGE OTTO.--The Early History of Charles James Fox by
George Otto Trevelyan, . . . London Longmans, Green, and Co. 1880 . . .
_8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TRISTRAM, W. OUTRAM.--Coaching Days and Coaching Ways by W. Outram
Tristram with 214 illustrations by Hugh Thomson and Herbert Railton
London Macmillan and Co. . . . 1893. _Imperial 8vo, buckram, uncut
edges._

No. 163 of two hundred and fifty large paper copies printed.


TROLLOPE, FRANCES MILTON.--Paris and the Parisians in 1835. By Frances
Trollope, . . . Second edition. . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . .
1836. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Etched frontispieces and twelve plates by A. Hervieu.


TROLLOPE, FRANCES MILTON.--Vienna and the Austrians; with some account
of a journey through Swabia, Bavaria, the Tyrol, and the Salzbourg. By
Frances Trollope, . . . In two volumes. London: Richard Bentley, . . .
1838. _8vo, two volumes, light brown morocco, gilt back, side panels,
gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. The Preface is dated Hadley, January 29, 1838, and the
engraved title-pages, 1837.

Engraved title-pages, frontispieces, and ten other plates drawn and
etched by A. Hervieu.


TROLLOPE, FRANCES MILTON.--The Widow Married; a sequel to "The Widow
Barnaby." By Frances Trollope, . . . With Numerous Illustrations. . . .
London: Henry Colburn, Publisher, [Harrison and Co., Printers] . . .
1840. _Post 8vo, three volumes, half brown levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

First edition. Twenty-one etchings by B. W. Buss.


TROLLOPE, FRANCES MILTON.--Life and Adventures of Michael Armstrong, the
factory boy. By Frances Trollope, author of "The Vicar of Wrexhill,"
"The Widow Barnaby," etc. In three volumes. . . . London: Henry Colburn,
publisher, [William Clowes and Sons, printers] . . . 1840. _Post 8vo,
three volumes, green levant morocco, gilt fillets, gilt top, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Twenty-four engravings, dated March 20-December 1, 1839.


TROLLOPE, FRANCES MILTON.--Charles Chesterfield, or the Adventures of a
Youth of Genius. By Mrs. Trollope, . . . London: Henry Colburn, . . .
1841. _Post 8vo, three volumes, blue morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by
The Club Bindery._

First edition. Twelve etchings by "Phiz."


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ADOLPHUS.--The Girlhood of Catherine de' Medici. By T.
Adolphus Trollope. London: Chapman and Hall . . . 1856. _Crown 8vo,
calf, gilt back, by Nutt._

First edition. Lithographic title, with portrait of Catherine de'
Medici.


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ADOLPHUS.--Filippo Strozzi. A History of the Last Days
of the Old Italian Liberty. By T. Adolphus Trollope, . . . London:
Chapman & Hall, . . . 1860. . . . _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Portrait after Bronzino (Titian?).


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ADOLPHUS.--Paul the Pope and Paul the Friar. A story of
an interdict. By T. Adolphus Trollope, . . . London: Chapman and Hall,
. . . 1861. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait by Livy.


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ADOLPHUS.--Giulio Malatesta a Novel. By T. Adolphus
Trollope . . . London: Chapman and Hall . . . 1863. _Crown 8vo, three
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ADOLPHUS.--A History of the Commonwealth of Florence,
from the earliest independence of the Commune to the fall of the
Republic in 1531. By T. Adolphus Trollope, . . . London: Chapman and
Hall, . . . 1865. _8vo, four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ANTHONY.--Barchester Towers. By Anthony Trollope,
author of "The Warden." . . . London: Longman, Brown, Green, Longmans, &
Roberts. 1857. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition.


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ANTHONY.--Can You Forgive Her? by Anthony Trollope, . . .
With Illustrations. . . . London: Chapman and Hall, . . . 1864. . . .
_8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Twenty etchings, and twenty woodcuts by Dalziel.


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ANTHONY.--The Belton Estate. By Anthony Trollope, . . .
London: Chapman and Hall, . . . 1866. . . . _Crown 8vo, three volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ANTHONY.--Orley Farm. By Anthony Trollope, . . . With
39 illustrations by J. E. Millais. London: Chapman and Hall, . . . 1866
. . . . _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ANTHONY.--The Claverings. By Anthony Trollope. With
sixteen illustrations, by M. Ellen Edwards. . . . London: Smith, Elder
and Co., . . . M. DCCC. LXVII. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ANTHONY.--Phineas Redux by Anthony Trollope, . . . With
twenty-four illustrations. London: Chapman and Hall, . . . 1874. _8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ANTHONY.--Harry Heathcote of Gangoil. A Tale of
Australian Bush Life. By Anthony Trollope. London: Sampson Low, Marston,
Low, & Searle, . . . 1874. . . . _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TROLLOPE, THOMAS ANTHONY.--Ayala's Angel by Anthony Trollope, . . .
London: Chapman and Hall . . . 1881. . . . _Crown 8vo, three volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


TRUSLER, JOHN.--Proverbs Exemplified, and Illustrated by Pictures from
Real Life. Teaching morality and a knowledge of the world; with prints.
Designed as a Succession-Book to AEsop's Fables. After the Manner, and by
the Author, of Hogarth Moralized [cut] Printed for and published by the
Rev. J. Trusler . . . London, May 1, 1790. _12mo, calf, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition. Fifty woodcut illustrations by John Bewick.


TRUMBULL, JOHN.--M^{c}Fingal: a modern epic poem, in four cantos. By John
Trumbull, Esq. embellished with nine copper plates; designed and
engraved by E. Tisdale. The first edition with plates, [including a
portrait] and explanatory notes. . . . New York: printed by John Buel,
. . . M, DCC, XCV. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, side panels,
gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._


TUCKERMAN, ARTHUR LYMAN.--Design by Arthur Lyman Tuckerman. New York
Wm. T. Comstock 1891. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

Presentation copy from the author.


TUCKERMAN, HENRY T.--Book of the Artists. American Artist Life,
comprising biographical and critical sketches of American artists:
preceded by an historical account of the rise and progress of art in
America. By Henry T. Tuckerman. With an appendix containing an account
of notable pictures and private collections. New York: G. P. Putnam and
Son, . . . 1867. _Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait of D. Huntington.


TUPPER, MARTIN FARQUHAR.--Proverbial Philosophy: by Martin F. Tupper . . .
Thirty-eighth Edition. London: Hatchard and Co. . . . 1860. _Crown
8vo, back and sides richly tooled, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Portrait engraved by Artlett from a bust by Durham.


TURNER AND GIRTIN.--River Scenery, by Turner and Girtin, with
descriptions by M^{rs}. Hofland. Engraved by Eminent Engravers, from
Drawings by J. M. W. Turner, R. A. and the late Thomas Girtin. [18
plates] 1827. London. Published by W. B. Cooke, . . . _Folio, green
morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


TURNER AND PARKER.--Some Account of Domestic Architecture in England,
from the Conquest to the End of the Thirteenth Century, [and Edward I to
Henry VIII] with numerous illustrations of existing remains from
original drawings. By T. Hudson Turner [and J. H. Parker] Oxford, John
Henry Parker, . . . MDCCCLI [LIII-LIX.] _8vo, four volumes, calf, gilt
back, gilt over uncut edges, by Bedford._

Three hundred and four illustrations. The first volume only is the work
of Turner. Parker had assisted him in preparing the book, and was
eminently fitted to complete the series.


TWINING, HENRY.--On the Philosophy of Painting: A Theoretical and
Practical Treatise; comprising aesthetics in reference to art, the
application of rules to painting, and general considerations on
perspective. By Henry Twining--London: Longman, . . . 1849. _Royal 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

Presentation copy from the author. The illustrations are on steel and
wood.


TWO TALES.--An Impossible Thing. A Tale. London: Printed: And Sold by
J. Roberts . . . M DCC XX. _4to, paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._

On pages 14-16 is the second tale, "The Peasant in Search of his Heifer.
A Tale, after M. De la Fontaine."


UNIVERSAL SONGSTER.--The Universal Songster; or Museum of Mirth: forming
the most complete, extensive, and valuable collection of Ancient and
Modern Songs in the English Language . . . Embellished with a [three]
humorous characteristic Frontispiece, and Twenty-nine Wood-cuts,
designed by George and Robert Cruikshank, and engraved by J. R.
Marshall. London: printed for John Fairburn . . . 1825. [-26] _8vo,
three volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


UTTERSON, S. E., _translator_.--Tales of the Dead. Principally
translated from the French . . . London: printed for White, Cochrane,
and Co., . . . 1813. _8vo, blue straight-grain morocco, gilt edges._

E. V. Utterson's copy, with a portrait of "S. E. Utterson" by Reynolds
after Chalon, and six water-colour drawings inserted. Mrs. Utterson was
the translator of these Tales, and presumably the inserted portrait bore
some resemblance to her.


UWINS, MRS. THOMAS.--A Memoir of Thomas Uwins, R. A. late keeper of the
Royal Galleries and the National Gallery . . . etc. By Mrs. Uwins. With
letters to his brothers during seven years spent in Italy and
correspondence with the late Sir Thomas Lawrence, Sir Charles L.
Eastlake, A. E. Chalon, R. A. and other distinguished persons . . .
London Longman, . . . 1858. _8vo, two volumes, original cloth, uncut
edges._


UZANNE, OCTAVE.--The French Bookbinders of the Eighteenth Century by
Octave Uzanne . . . translated by Mabel McIlvaine Chicago published by
the Caxton Club   MDCCCCIV. _Royal 4to, half cloth, uncut edges._

One of two hundred and fifty-two copies printed on hand-made paper, with
twenty coloured plates, five head-pieces from wash-drawings by Paul
Avril, and fifteen binders' labels, etc.


VALE, G.--A Compendium of the Life of Thomas Paine. By G. Vale. [Teacher
of the Arts depending on the Mathematics.] Published by the Author, . . .
and by Messrs G. & W. Matsell, . . . New York. 1837. _8vo, brown
levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

The substance of an address delivered at Tammany Hall on Sunday, January
29, 1837, the centennial anniversary of Paine's birthday.


VALENTINES.--(I.)A Few Shots from Cupid's Bow. Being Original Valentines
for Ladies and Gentlemen, who wish to convey the Sentiments of Love in
the most expressive language London: printed by Dean and Son. [n. d.]

(II.) A Few Shots [as above, but with extensive revision] London: Dean
and C^{o}. [n. d.]

(III.) The Gentlemen's Polite Valentine Writer. . . . London: published
by Dean and C^{o}. [n. d.]

(IV.) The Book of Love; or the Poesy of St. Valentine . . . London.
Published by A. Park. [n. d.]

(V.) Liber Amoris: or the Book of Love . . . London: published by A.
Park . . . [n. d.] _8vo, five works in one volume, half red morocco,
uncut edges, with the original covers bound in, by R. W. Smith._

Each of the five works has a large coloured frontispiece.


VANDAM, ALBERT.--An Englishman in Paris (Notes and Recollections) . . .
London: Chapman & Hall . . . 1892. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


VANIERE, JACQUES.--Fishing. A Translation from the Latin of Vanier. Book
XV. upon Fish. By the late Rev. John Duncombe, . . . With a brief
introduction; and passages from English writers, selected as notes.
London: printed for R. Triphook, . . . 1809. _8vo, original paper
wrappers, uncut edges._

One of fifty copies printed. Originally published in Brydges's "Censura
Literaria."


VASARI, GEORGE.--The Life of Giovanni Angelico da Fiesole, Translated
from the Italian of Vasari by Giovanni Aubrey Bezzi, With Notes and
Illustrations. Printed for the Arundel Society. 1850. _4to, half red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Twenty-one plates, proofs on India paper.


VAUGHAN, ROBERT ALFRED.--Essays and Remains of the Rev. Robert Alfred
Vaughan. Edited, with a Memoir, by the Rev. Robert Vaughan. London: John
W. Parker and Son . . . 1858. _Square post 8vo, half blue morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait of the author.


VAUGHAN, ROBERT ALFRED.--Hours with the Mystics. A Contribution to the
History of Religious Opinion. By Robert Alfred Vaughan B. A. Second
Edition Revised and Augmented by the Author. London: John W. Parker and
Son . . . 1860. _Square post 8vo, half blue morocco, gilt back, gilt
top, uncut edges._


VEGA, GARCILASSO DE LA.--The Works of Garcilasso de la Vega, surnamed
the Prince of Castilian Poets, Translated into English Verse; with a
critical and historical Essay on Spanish Poetry, and a Life of the
Author. By J. H. Wiffen. London: printed for Hurst, Robinson, and Co. . . .
1823. _8vo, green levant morocco, back and side panels richly
tooled, arms on the sides, gilt edges, by Riviere._

One of the twenty-five copies printed on large paper for presentation.

This copy, No. 9, was given by the translator to Samuel Rogers, the
poet. It has a cancelled leaf at page xv, with autograph correction.
Portrait of the author, by Cooper after Parez, and woodcut
illustrations, proofs on India paper.


VERSES in Memory of a Lady. Written at Sandgate Castle, M DCC LXVIII. . . .
London, Printed for T. Becket and P. A. De Hondt . . . M DCC
LXVIII. _4to, paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._

Contains the half-title and final leaf of Advertisement.


VESPUCCI, AMERIGO.--The First Four Voyages of Amerigo Vespucci reprinted
in facsimile and translated From the rare original edition (Florence,
1505-6). London Bernard Quaritch . . . 1893. _4to, original paper
covers, uncut edges._

Frontispiece and folded map, besides the woodcuts in the facsimile.


[VESTRIS, MADAME.]--. . . Memoirs of the Life, public and private
adventures, of Madame Vestris; [Lucia Elizabeth Bartolozzi--Mrs. Charles
James Mathews] . . . with Interesting and Curious Anecdotes of
celebrated and distinguished characters in the fashionable world.
Detailing an interesting variety of singularly curious and amusing
scenes, as performed before and behind the curtain, Both in Public and
Private Life, "at home" and abroad. By a Naval Officer. Dedicated to the
King. . . . Embellished with Portraits, and Curious Coloured Plates.
London: printed & published by John Duncombe, . . . [n. d.] _12mo, half
citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

First edition: with portrait drawn and engraved by Kennerley, and five
coloured plates by Marks.

Madame Vestris obtained an injunction against the publisher of this book
and it was suppressed.


VIEW OF THE TOWN.--A View of the Town: in an Epistle to a Friend in the
Country. A Satire. . . . London: Printed by R. Penny, for the Author,
and sold by A. Dodd, . . . 1735. _Folio, red levant morocco._


VILLARI, PASQUALE.--Life and Times of Girolamo Savonarola by Professor
Pasquale Villari translated by Linda Villari with portraits and
illustrations. . . . London: T. Fisher Unwin . . . M DCCC LXXX VIII.
_8vo, two volumes, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait on steel and twenty-seven other illustrations.


VILLON, FRANCOIS.--The Poems of Master Francis Villon of Paris, now
first done into English verse, in the original forms, by John Payne,
author of 'The Masque of Shadows', 'Intaglios', 'Songs of Life and
Death', &c. London: printed for the Villon Society, for private
distribution, M DCCCLXXVIII. _8vo, green levant morocco, gilt back, side
panels, centre ornament, gilt top, uncut edges, by De Coverly._

One of two copies printed upon vellum.

Woodcut frontispiece, which is repeated in gilt on the upper side of the
binding.


VILLON, FRANCOIS.--The Poems of Master Francois Villon of Paris, now
first done into English verse, in the original forms, with a
biographical and critical introduction, by John Payne, . . . London: M
DCCC XCII: printed for the Villon Society by private subscription and
for private circulation only. _8vo, vellum boards, gilt top, uncut
edges._

No. 306 of a limited edition.


VIRGILIUS MARO, PUBLIUS.--The first Four Books of the AEneid of Virgil,
in English heroic verse. With other translations and poems. By Richard
Stanyhurst. Printed at Edinburgh. [Edinburgh Printing Company.] M DCCC
XXXVI. _4to, cloth, uncut edges._

One of fifty copies privately printed.


VIRGILIUS MARO, PUBLIUS.--See Morris, William.


VIRTUE IN DISTRESS.--See Pretender.


VIZETELLY, HENRY.--Berlin under the New Empire, its institutions,
inhabitants, industry, monuments, museums, social life, manners, and
amusements. By Henry Vizetelly, . . . Illustrated with upwards of 400
engravings from designs by German artists. . . . London: Tinsley
Brothers, . . . 1879. _8vo, two volumes, red calf, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Tout._


VOCAL MAGAZINE.--The Vocal Magazine. Containing a selection of the most
esteemed English, Scots, and Irish Songs, antient and modern: adapted
for the harpsichord or violin. . . . Edinburgh: Printed by C. Stewart &
Co. 1797. . . . [-1800] _8vo, three volumes and seventeen songs of
Volume IV in two volumes, half calf, gilt back, uncut edges, with the
original covers bound in._

The covers are from No. I to No. XIX, 1797-1800, the magazine having
been issued monthly.


VOLKMANN, LUDWIG.--Iconografia Dantesca the pictorial representations to
Dante's Divine Comedy by Ludwig Volkmann   Revised and Augmented by the
Author with a preface by Charles Sarolea . . . With Seventeen Plates and
Four Woodcuts London H. Grevel & Co. . . . 1899. _Royal 8vo, half
vellum, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 17 of two hundred and fifty copies printed.


VOLTAIRE, FRANCOIS MARIE AROUET DE.--Three Epistles in the Ethic Way.
From the French of M. de Voltaire. Viz. I. Happiness. II. Freedom of
Will. III. Envy. London: Printed for R. Dodsley, . . . M. DCC. XXXVIII
. . . . _8vo, paper wrappers, by The Club Bindery._

Three sub-titles and a final leaf of advertisement.


WAAGEN, G. F.--Peter Paul Rubens, his life and genius. Translated from
the German of Dr. Waagen, by Robert R. Noel, Esq. Edited by Mrs.
Jameson. London: Saunders and Otley, . . . MDCCCXL. _Crown 8vo, original
cloth, uncut edges._


WAAGEN, G. F.--Handbook of Painting. The German, Flemish, and Dutch
Schools. Based on the Handbook of Kugler. Enlarged and for the most part
re-written. By Dr. Waagen, . . . With [57] illustrations. . . . London:
John Murray, . . . 1860. . . . _Crown 8vo, two volumes, blue levant
morocco, gilt back, side corners, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._


WAECHTER, HARRIET, _editor_.--The Chaucer Birthday Book. Compiled by
Harriet Waechter . . . London: Griffith, Farran, Okeden and Welsh . . .
Mdccclxxxix. _Square 8vo, vellum, uncut edges._

Portrait of Chaucer from Pickering's plate.

Printed in Gothic type by Whittingham.


"WAGSTAFF, SIMON."--See Swift, Jonathan.


WAKEFIELD, GILBERT.--An Examination of the Age of Reason, or an
investigation of true and fabulous theology, by Thomas Paine. By Gilbert
Wakefield, B. A. late Fellow of Jesus-College, Cambridge. . . . London:
Printed: New York: re-printed by G. Forman, . . . for J. Fellows, . . .
1794--_8vo, brown levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

Final leaf of advertisements.


WALKER, ALEXANDER.--Beauty illustrated chiefly by an Analysis and
Classification of Beauty in Woman. Preceded by a critical view of the
general hypotheses respecting beauty, by Hume, Hogarth, Burke, Knight,
Alison, etc., and followed by a similar view of the hypotheses of beauty
in sculpture and painting by Leonardo da Vinci, Winckelmann, Mengs,
Bossi, etc. By Alexander Walker, . . . illustrated by drawings from
life, by Henry Howard, . . . drawn on stone by M. Gauci and R. J. Lane,
. . . London: Effingham Wilson, . . . 1836. _Royal 8vo, blue levant
morocco, floral mosaic on back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by
David._

First edition, with the twenty-two plates on India paper.


WALKER, ALEXANDER.--Intermarriage; or the mode in which, and the causes
why, Beauty, Health and Intellect, result from certain unions, and
Deformity, Disease and Insanity, from others; . . . Illustrated by
Drawings of Parents and Progeny. By Alexander Walker. London: John
Churchill . . . MDCCCXXXVIII. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


WALKER, ALEXANDER.--Woman physiologically considered as to Mind, Morals,
Marriage, Matrimonial Slavery, Infidelity and Divorce. By Alexander
Walker. . . . London: A. H. Baily and Co., . . . 1839. _Crown 8vo,
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


WALKER, THOMAS.--The Wit of a Woman. As it is now Acted at the New
Theatre In Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields. By Her Majesty's Sworn Servants.
London, Printed for Richard Bassett, at the Mitre in Fleet-street,
and J. Chantry, at the Pestle and Mortar without Temple-Bar. 1705.
_4to, citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. Half-title and title, two leaves, and A-F1 in fours.
Advertisement, F2.


WALLIS, ALFRED.--Examples of the Book-Binder's Art of the XVI. and XVII.
Centuries, selected chiefly from the Royal Continental Libraries, with
Descriptions and an Introduction by Alfred Wallis . . . James G. Commin,
Exeter . . . Printed for the Subscribers only, M. DCCC. XC. _Folio, half
olive morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

No. 82 of one hundred copies printed, with forty plates.


WALLIS, HENRY.--The Godman Collection Persian Ceramic Art in the
Collection of Mr. F. Du Cane Godman, F. R. S. The Thirteenth Century
Lustred Vases. By Henry Wallis. With illustrations by the author.
London: printed for private circulation. M DCCC XCI. _Imperial 4to, half
citron morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by R. H. Porter._

Twenty-nine coloured plates, and numerous marginal illustrations.

No. 34 of two hundred copies printed.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--A Catalogue of the Royal and Noble Authors of England,
With Lists of their Works . . . The Second Edition, corrected and
enlarged. London: Printed for R. and J. Dodsley . . . MDCCLIX. _8vo, two
volumes, contemporary red morocco, gilt back, thistle border on the
sides._

Frontispiece by Grignion.

Horace Walpole's copy, with his book-plate.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--A Catalogue of the Royal and Noble Authors of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; with Lists of their Works: by the late Horatio
Walpole, Earl of Orford. Enlarged and continued to the present time by
Thomas Park . . . London: printed for John Scott . . . 1806. _4to, five
volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Holloway._

Large paper copy, with three hundred and fifteen portraits, duplicates
of the regular series, proofs before letters, the variation of most of
these plates, also proofs, the original engraving of the Duchess of
Newcastle by Peter von Schappen, an India proof impression before all
letters of the Lodge portrait of Horace Walpole, also two letters in the
autograph of Walpole, one to John Pinkerton, the other to Dr. Ducarel,
both referring to this book.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--Portraits of Royal and Noble Authors Publish'd . . .
by S. Harding (London 1798-1802) _Royal 4to, half red levant morocco,
Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by Rousselle._

One hundred and forty-five portraits in semi-outline, and three from the
British Cabinet by Adolphus.

These portraits must not be confounded with the series issued with the
edition of 1806, for while most are taken from the same originals, some
do not appear in the later issue.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--Anecdotes of Painting in England; with some Account of
the principal Artists; and incidental Notes on other Arts; collected by
the late Mr. George Vertue; and now digested and published from his
original MSS. By Mr. Horace Walpole . . . Printed by Thomas Farmer at
Strawberry-Hill   MDCCLXII [LXIII--LXXI] _4to, four volumes, red
morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt edges, by Henderson & Bisset._

One hundred and four plates of portraits. The fourth volume contains
"The History of the Modern Taste in Gardening," and is printed by Thomas
Kirgate. The "Additional Lives" are bound with the second and third
volumes.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--Anecdotes of Painting in England, with some Account of
the principal Artists; and incidental Notes on other Arts; collected by
the late Mr. George Vertue; and now digested and published from his
original MSS. By Mr. Horace Walpole . . . Printed by Thomas Farmer at
Strawberry Hill   MDCCLXII. [III-XXI] _4to, four volumes, old red
morocco, gilt back, gilt edges._

One hundred and four plates of portraits. The fourth volume, printed by
Kirgate, contains "The History of the Modern Taste in Gardening." The
"Additional Lives" are in the third volume.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--Anecdotes of Painting in England; with some Account of
the principal Artists; and incidental Notes on other Arts; collected by
the late Mr. George Vertue; digested and published from his Original
MSS. By the Honourable Horace Walpole; with considerable additions by
the Rev. James Dallaway London: printed at the Shakespeare Press, by W.
Nicol, for John Major . . . MDCCCXXVIII. _Royal 8vo, five volumes,
citron levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

Large paper copy. The portraits and woodcuts published with these
volumes are duplicated by the insertion of unlettered proofs on India
paper. In addition, one hundred and twenty-two plates have been
inserted, comprising twenty-four India proofs of English kings by
Worthington, fifty-eight portraits from the Strawberry-Hill Press, a
drawing by Harding of Horace Walpole as a child, etc.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--A Catalogue of Engravers, who have been born, or
resided in England; digested by Mr. Horace Walpole from the MSS. of Mr.
George Vertue; to which is added an Account of the Life and Works of the
latter . . . Strawberry-Hill: Printed in the Year MDCCLXIII. _4to, red
morocco, gilt back and side panels, gilt edges, by Henderson & Bisset._

First edition. Nine plates of portraits.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--A Catalogue of Engravers. 1763. _4to, old red morocco,
gilt back, gilt edges._

Another copy.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--A Catalogue of Engravers, Who have been born or
resided in England; digested by Mr. Horace Walpole from the MSS. of Mr.
George Vertue; To which is added An Account of the Life and Works of the
latter. The Second Edition . . . Strawberry-Hill: Printed in the Year
MDCCLXV. _4to, half red morocco, red top, uncut edges._

Nine copper-plate portraits.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--The Castle of Otranto, a story. Translated by
William Marshal, Gent. From the Original Italian of Onuphrio Muralto,
Canon of the Church of St. Nicholas at Otranto. London: Printed for Tho.
Lownds . . . MDCCLXV. _8vo, red levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges,
by The Club Bindery._

First edition, which consisted of very few copies.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--The Castle of Otranto, a Gothic Story. Translated by
William Marshal, Gent. from the original Italian of Onuphrio Muralto, . . .
The Sixth Edition. [Parma] Printed with Bodoni's characters for
Edwards . . . of London MDCCXC. _Royal 8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt
back, side borders in scrolls, flowers, foliage, and small tools, gilt
over uncut edges, in a brown straight-grain morocco case, by Bedford._

Marshal Junot's copy, one of six printed upon vellum.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--The Castle of Otranto, a Gothic Story. Translated by
William Marshal, Gent. from the original Italian of Onuphrio Muralto . . .
The Sixth Edition. Parma. Printed by Bodoni, for J. Edwards,
Bookseller of London. MDCCXCI. _Royal 8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt
back and sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Joly._

Large paper copy, with brilliant portrait of Walpole by Falconet, and
view of the Castle of Otranto in two states, engraver's etching and
finished proof.

Portrait inserted.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--Jeffery's Edition of the Castle of Otranto, a Gothic
Story. Translated by William Marshal, Gent. from the original Italian of
Onuphrio Muralto . . . London: Printed by Cooper and Graham . . . 1796.
_8vo, red levant morocco, Janseniste, gilt top, uncut edges, by
Chambolle-Duru._

Seven coloured plates, engraved by Birrell, with a gold border added to
each plate.


WALPOLE AND REEVE.--. . . The Old English Baron   A Gothic Story By
Clara Reeve also The Castle of Otranto   A Gothic Story   By Horace
Walpole With Two Portraits and Four Drawings by A. H. Tourrier   Etched
by Damman   London   J. C. Nimmo and Bain . . . 1883. _8vo, two works in
one volume, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 71 of one hundred and fifty large paper copies printed, with proof
etchings on Japan paper.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--The Mysterious Mother. A Tragedy. By Mr. Horace
Walpole. Printed at Strawberry-Hill: MDCCLXVIII. _8vo, citron morocco,
rich gilt back and sides, inside borders, satin linings, gilt edges, by
Roger Payne._

First edition, fifty copies printed.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--The Mysterious Mother. 1768. _8vo, blue morocco, rich
gilt back and sides, gilt over uncut edges, by Clarke and Bedford._

Another copy.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--The Mysterious Mother. A Tragedy. London: Printed for
J. Dodsley, . . . M.DCC.LXXXI. _8vo, brown levant morocco, Janseniste,
gilt edges, by Smith-Mansell. STREATFEILD'S "Comedies" are bound at the
end._

Second edition. Presentation copy "From the Author," with five
water-colour drawings.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--Letters of Horace Walpole   Earl of Orford, to Sir
Horace Mann, British Envoy at the Court of Tuscany. Now first published
from the originals in the possession of the Earl of Waldegrave. Edited
by Lord Dover; with an original memoir of the Author, by the Editor.
Third edition . . . London: Richard Bentley, . . . 1834. _8vo, three
volumes, gilt top, uncut edges._

Portrait by Dean after a miniature by Zincke.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--The Letters of Horace Walpole, Earl of Orford:
including numerous Letters now first published from the original
manuscripts . . . 1735-1797. London: Richard Bentley . . . 1840. _8vo,
six volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First collected edition. Twenty-four steel portraits.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--The Letters of Horace Walpole, Earl of Orford. Edited
by Peter Cunningham. Now first chronologically arranged. [cut] In nine
volumes. . . . London: Richard Bentley, M.D.CCC.LVII.[-IX.] _8vo, nine
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First Cunningham edition: with thirty-nine plates.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--Memoirs of the Reign of King George the Third. By
Horace Walpole . . . now first published from the original MSS. edited,
with notes, by Sir Denis Le Marchant . . . London: Richard Bentley . . .
1845. _8vo, four volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Steel portraits of George III, Queen Charlotte, Duke of
Grafton, and the Hon. Charles Townshend.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--Memoirs of the Reign of King George the Second. By
Horace Walpole . . . Edited, from the original MSS. with a preface and
notes, by the late Lord Holland. Second Edition, Revised. With the
original mottoes. London: Henry Colburn . . . 1847. _8vo, three volumes,
cloth, uncut edges._

First octavo edition, with six steel portraits.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--Memoirs of Horace Walpole and his Contemporaries;
including numerous original letters chiefly from Strawberry Hill. Edited
by Eliot Warburton . . . London: Henry Colburn . . . 1851. _8vo, two
volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portraits of Horace Walpole and Mary Berry.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--Journal of the Reign of King George the Third, from
the year 1771 to 1783. By Horace Walpole. Now first published from
Original MSS . . . Edited, with Notes, by Dr. Doran. London: Richard
Bentley . . . MDCCCLIX. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Portraits of John Wilkes and Francis, Lord North.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--Horace Walpole's Marginal Notes, written in Dr. Maty's
Miscellaneous Works and Memoirs of the Earl of Chesterfield. 2 vols.
4to. 1777. Communicated by R. S. Turner, Esq. The possessor of the
volumes, [n. p., n. d.] _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt top, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._


[WALPOLE, HORACE.]--Horace Walpole and his world. Select passages from
his Letters. Edited by L. B. Seeley . . . with eight illustrations after
Sir Joshua Reynolds and Sir Thomas Lawrence. London. Seeley, Jackson,
and Halliday . . . 1884. _Square 8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back and
sides, gilt top, uncut edges, by Matthews._

Large paper copy, with one hundred portraits and views inserted,
including mezzotints after Reynolds, a large number of proofs before
letters and on India paper.


WALPOLE, HORACE.--See Pilkington and Fuseli.


WAR IN AMERICA.--An Impartial History of the War in America, between
Great Britain and Her Colonies, from its Commencement to the end of the
Year 1779. Exhibiting a circumstantial, connected, and complete Account
of the real Causes, Rise, and Progress of the War, interspersed with
Anecdotes and Characters of the different Commanders, and Accounts of
such Personages in Congress as have distinguished themselves during the
Contest. With an Appendix, containing A Collection of Interesting and
Authentic Papers tending to elucidate the History. Illustrated with a
Variety [13] of beautiful Copper-Plates, representing real and animated
Likenesses of those celebrated Generals who have distinguished
themselves in the important Contest. [and a map]. London: Printed for R.
Faulder . . . M,DCC,LXXX. _8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt
over rough edges, by Bedford._


WARD, EDWARD.--Nuptial Dialogues and Debates: or, An Useful Prospect of
the Felicities and Discomforts of a Marry'd Life, incident to all
Degrees, from the Throne to the Cottage. Containing many great Examples
of Love, Piety, Prudence, Justice, and all the excellent Vertues that
largely contribute to the true Happiness of Wedlock. Drawn from the
Lives of our own Princes, Nobility, and other Quality, in Prosperity and
Adversity. Also the fantastical Humours of all Fops, Coquets, Bullies,
Jilts, fond Fools and Wantons, old Fumblers, barren Ladies, Misers,
parsimonious Wives, Ninnies, Sluts, and Termagants, drunken Husbands,
toaping Gossips, schismatical Precisians, and devout Hypocrites of all
sorts. Digested into serious, merry, and satyrical Poems, wherein both
Sexes in all Stations, are reminded of their Duty, and taught how to be
happy in a Matrimonial State. By the Author of the London-Spy . . .
London: Printed for T. Norris . . . 1723. _12mo, two volumes, citron
levant morocco, gilt and mosaic back, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Eight plates drawn and engraved by J. Pine.


WARING, J. B., _editor_.--. . . Art Treasures of the United Kingdom from
the Art Treasures Exhibition, Manchester edited by J. B. Waring chromo
lithographed by F. Bedford. The drawings on wood by R. Dudley. With
Essays by Owen Jones, Digby Wyatt, A. W. Franks, J. B. Waring, J. C.
Robinson & G. Scharf. Jun. London, 1858. Day and Son. . . . _Royal 4to,
dark brown calf, back and sides covered with a mosaic design of
interlacing ribbons in darker brown calf, gilt ornaments._

One hundred plates and numerous woodcuts in the text.


WARNER, CHARLES DUDLEY.--Our Italy   by Charles Dudley Warner . . . With
Many Illustrations   New York   Harper & Brothers, . . . M DCCCXCII.
_8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


WARNER, GEORGE F.--Illuminated Manuscripts in the British Museum.
Miniatures, borders, and initials reproduced in gold and colours. With
descriptive text by George F. Warner, . . . First Series. Fifteen
Plates. Printed by Order of the Trustees. . . . London, 1899. _Folio, in
a half cloth portfolio._


WARREN, ARTHUR.--The Charles Whittinghams printers by Arthur Warren
New York the Grolier Club of New York   MDCCCLXXXXVI. _8vo, half green
morocco, uncut edges._

Three hundred and eighty-five copies printed, with portraits and
numerous facsimile illustrations in the text. The Index, pages 345-353,
was issued after the publication of the volume.


WARREN, ARTHUR.--The Charles Whittinghams. 1896. _8vo, blue levant
morocco, gilt back and side borders in a design of scrolls, flowers, and
birds, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

One of three copies printed upon vellum.


WARREN, J. LEICESTER.--A Guide to the Study of Book-plates (Ex-libris)
by the Hon. J. Leicester Warren . . . London John Pearson . . . 1880.
_8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Sixteen full-page woodcuts.


WARREN, SAMUEL.--Passages from the Diary of a late Physician. By Samuel
Warren . . . William Blackwood & Sons, Edinburgh . . . MDCCCXXXVIII.
_Post 8vo, three volumes, half red morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


WARREN, SAMUEL.--Ten Thousand a-Year. In three volumes . . . William
Blackwood and Sons, . . . M.DCCC.XLI. _Post 8vo, three volumes, half
green levant morocco, gilt back, striped green silk sides, uncut edges,
by The Club Bindery._


WARREN, SAMUEL.--Miscellanies critical, imaginative, and juridical,
contributed to Blackwood's Magazine. By Samuel Warren. William Blackwood
and Sons, Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLV. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._


WARTON, JOSEPH.--An Essay on the Genius and Writings of Pope . . . By
Joseph Warton . . . The fifth edition, corrected. To which is now added,
an Index   London: Printed by Thomas Maiden . . . 1806. _8vo, two
volumes, brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt over uncut edges, by
Holloway._

Large paper copy, illustrated by the insertion of one hundred and
twenty-five portraits (twenty-three of Pope) and scenes. Many of the
plates are proofs before letters, and seventeen are on India paper.
Included are a fine mezzotint of Samuel Butler and Caroline Watson's
engraving of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.


WARTON, THOMAS.--The Poems on various subjects, of Thomas Warton, B. D.
. . . London: printed for G. G. J. and J. Robinson, . . . M.DCC.XCI.
_8vo, maroon levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

Portrait and autograph of the author inserted.


WARTON, THOMAS.--The History of English Poetry, from the close of the
Eleventh to the commencement of the Eighteenth Century. To which are
prefixed, Three Dissertations

  1. Of the Origin of Romantic Fiction in Europe.
  2. On the Introduction of Learning into England.
  3. On the Gesta Romanorum.

By Thomas Warton, B. D. . . . A new edition carefully revised, with
numerous additional notes by the late Mr. Ritson, the late Dr. Ashby,
Mr. Douce, Mr. Park and other eminent Antiquaries, and by the Editor.
[Richard Price]   London: printed for Thomas Tegg . . . 1824. _8vo, four
volumes, boards, uncut edges._

Portrait.


WARTON, THOMAS.--The History of English Poetry, from the close of the
eleventh century to the commencement of the eighteenth century. To which
are prefixed Three Dissertations: by Thomas Warton, B. D. . . . From the
Edition of 1824 superintended by the late Richard Price Esq. including
the Notes of Mr. Ritson, Dr. Ashby, Mr. Douce, and Mr. Park. Now further
improved . . . London: printed for Thomas Tegg . . . 1840. _8vo, three
volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt edges, by Matthews._

Portrait after Reynolds.


"WARWICK, EDEN."--See Jabet, George.


WASHINGTON, GEORGE.--Official Letters to the honorable American
Congress, written, during the War between the United Colonies and Great
Britain, by his excellency George Washington . . . Copied, by Special
Permission, from the Original Papers preserved in the Office of the
Secretary of State, Philadelphia. London: printed for Cadell Junior and
Davies . . . 1795. _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Matthews._

Contains, in addition to the duplicate titles, "American State Papers,"
etc., the B. B. E. portrait of Washington, an autograph letter of John
Hancock to Washington, dated 27 Aug. 1776, and endorsed by the latter; a
folio letter of Washington to General McDougall from headquarters at
Morristown, March 21, 1777, and an Ensign's Commission, signed by John
Hancock, and attested by Charles Thomson.


WASHINGTON, GEORGE.--A Message of the President of the United States,
to Congress, relative to France and Great Britain: delivered, December
5, 1793. With the papers therein referred to. Published by Order of
the House of Representatives. Philadelphia: printed for Mathew
Carey, . . . October 24, 1795. _8vo, brown levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._


WASHINGTON, GEORGE.--Address of George Washington, President of the
United States, to his Fellow Citizens, On his declining being considered
a Candidate for their future suffrages. To which is added   The Tribute
of Respect, paid to his memory, by the legislature of New-Hampshire, at
their late session at Exeter, December 28th. 1799. Exeter, from the
press of Henry Ranlet. 1800. _12mo, green levant morocco, Janseniste,
gilt edges (partly uncut, and with the original covers), by Riviere._

One hundred copies printed for the students of Phillips Exeter Academy.

The false title is "Washington's Legacy."


WASHINGTON, GEORGE.--Diary of Washington: from the first day of October,
1789, to the tenth day of March, 1790. from the Original Manuscript, now
first printed. New York: 1858. _Royal 8vo, green levant morocco, gilt
back and side borders in the Gasconesque manner, gilt top, uncut edges,
by W. Matthews._

Large paper copy. Inserted are a Washington manuscript, signed, fifteen
portraits of Washington, forty-seven other portraits, and eleven views,
many of the engravings being proofs.


WATKINS, JOHN.--See Hone, William.


WATSON, WILLIAM.--Lachrymae Musarum. (October 6th, 1892.) By William
Watson, . . . London: Printed for Private Distribution. 1892. _Crown
8vo, silk covers._

First edition. Frontispiece and portrait bust of Tennyson.

Vellum copy, one hundred printed.


WATSON, WILLIAM.--The Eloping Angels   a caprice by William Watson.
London. Elkin Mathews and John Lane . . . 1893. _4to, vellum, uncut
edges._

First edition. One of seventy-five copies printed on large, Japanese
vellum paper.


WATSON, WILLIAM.--Excursions in Criticism being some prose recreations
of a rhymer. By William Watson. London: Elkin Mathews & John Lane . . .
MDCCCXCIII. _8vo, boards, uncut edges._

First edition. Large paper copy, fifty printed.


WATSON, WILLIAM.--The Poems of William Watson. New York   Macmillan and
Co . . . 1893. _Crown 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

One hundred copies printed on hand-made paper.


WATSON, WILLIAM.--The Poems of William Watson   new [second] edition
rearranged by the author with additions. New York   Macmillan and Co . . .
1893. _8vo, buckram, uncut edges._

One hundred copies printed on hand-made paper, with a portrait of the
author.


WATT, ROBERT.--Bibliotheca Britannica; or a General Index to British and
Foreign Literature. By Robert Watt, M. D. . . . Edinburgh: printed for
Archibald Constable and Company, . . . 1824. _4to, two parts in four
volumes, half green morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._


WATTS, ALARIC.--Poetical Sketches: The Profession; The Broken Heart,
etc. with stanzas for music, and other poems. By Alaric A. Watts. Third
edition, with additional poems. Illustrated with [2] engravings from
drawings by Messrs. Stothard and Brockedon. . . . London: printed for
Hurst, Robinson, and Co. . . . 1824. _Post 8vo, boards, uncut edges._


WATTS, ALARIC A.--Lyrics of the Heart; with other Poems. By Alaric A.
Watts. With forty-one engravings on steel. London: Longman . . . 1851.
_8vo, blue levant morocco, back and sides richly ornamented, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Matthews._

The engravings are after the designs of Stothard, Westall, David
Roberts, Howard, and others.


WATTS, ISAAC.--Divine Songs Attempted in easy Language, for the Use of
Children. By I. Watts, D. D., . . . The Twelfth Edition. London: Printed
for Richard Ford, . . . 1733. _12mo, blue levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt edges, by Bedford._


WATTS, ISAAC.--Divine and Moral Songs for Children. By Isaac Watts. D.
D. London: The Religious Tract Society &c [n. d.] _12mo, calf, gilt,
gilt edges, by F. Bedford._

Seventy woodcut illustrations.


WATTS, ISAAC.--Horae Lyricae. Poems, chiefly of the lyric kind, in three
books. . . . By Isaac Watts, D. D. To which is added, a supplement,
containing translations of all the Latin poems, with notes, by Thomas
Gibbons, D. D. . . . With a Memoir of the Author, by Robert Southey,
Esq. London: printed and published by Joseph Rickerby, . . . 1836. _Post
8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait of Watts by Scriven.


WATTS, ISAAC.--The Poetical Works of Isaac Watts. With a Memoir. . . .
Boston: Little, Brown, and Company. 1866. _12mo, half green cloth, uncut
edges._

No. 13 of one hundred large paper copies printed, with portrait on India
paper.


WEBSTER, NOAH.--Dissertations on the English Language: with Notes
Historical and Critical, To which is added, by way of Appendix, an Essay
on a Reformed Mode of Spelling, with Dr. Franklin's Arguments on that
Subject. By Noah Webster, Jun. Esquire . . . Printed at Boston, for the
Author, by Isaiah Thomas and Company, MDCCLXXXIX. _8vo, green levant
morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by Rousselle._


WEBSTER, NOAH.--An American Dictionary of the English Language. By Noah
Webster, L. L. D. Thoroughly Revised, and greatly Enlarged and Improved
by Chauncey A. Goodrich . . . and Noah Porter . . . Cambridge. Printed
at the Riverside Press for G. & C. Merriam, publishers, Springfield,
Mass. 1865. _Folio, two volumes, brown morocco antique, gilt top, uncut
edges, by Matthews._

Large paper copy, two hundred and fifty printed, with portrait of
Webster, and engraved title, on India paper.


WEDMORE, FREDERICK.--Meryon and Meryon's Paris: with a descriptive
catalogue of the artist's work. By Frederick Wedmore. London: A. W.
Thibaudeau . . . 1879. _Crown 8vo, vellum, uncut edges._

One hundred and thirteen copies printed.


WEDMORE, FREDERICK.--Four Masters of Etching. By Frederick Wedmore. With
original etchings by Haden, Jacquemart, Whistler, and Legros. London:
The Fine Art Society, . . . 1883. _4to, half brown morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._

One of one hundred and twenty-five large paper copies printed.


WEIROTTER, F. E.--[Etched Works of F. E. Weirotter, consisting of One
hundred and eighty designs, including many titles. 1760 &c] _Folio, red
morocco, gilt back and sides, gilt edges._


WELD, H. HASTINGS.--Benjamin Franklin: his autobiography; with a
narrative of his public life and services. By Rev. H. Hastings Weld.
With numerous designs [76] by J. G. Chapman. London: Sampson Low, . . .
[n. d.] _8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


WELLINGTON.--The Letters of the Duke of Wellington to Miss [A. M.]
J.[enkins] 1834-1851 edited, with extracts from the diary of the latter,
by Christine Terhune Herrick   New York   Dodd, Mead, & Company, 1889.
_16mo, boards, uncut edges._

Inserted is a letter from the Duke of Wellington to Miss Jenkins.


WELLS, NATHANIEL ARMSTRONG.--The Picturesque Antiquities of Spain;
described in a series of letters, with illustrations, [ten plates and
nineteen woodcuts] representing Moorish palaces, cathedrals, and other
monuments of art, contained in the cities of Burgos, Valladolid, Toledo,
and Seville. By Nathaniel Armstrong Wells, London: Richard Bentley, . . .
M.DCCC.XLVI. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


WESTMACOTT, RICHARD.--Handbook of Sculpture ancient and modern by
Richard Westmacott . . . Edinburgh Adam and Charles Black . . . 1864.
_12mo, cloth, uncut edges._

Frontispiece and other illustrations.


WESTMINSTER SCHOOL (ST. PETER'S COLLEGE).--Comitia
Westmonasteriensium, in Collegio S^{ti} Petri habita die
anniversario fundatricis suae Reginae Elizabethae Inauguratae Jan. XV.
[engraved coat of arms]   Londini, Typis Guil. Bowyer: . . . apud
Jacobum Roberts . . . MDCCXXVIII. _Folio, red morocco, gilt edges, by
The Club Bindery. Bound with two other works entirely in Latin._

The contents of this volume are a Latin poem to the King by Robert Hay,
an English poem to the Queen by Lord Middlesex, a Latin address by
Thomas Kingsman, eighty-two short poems in Latin and English by alumni
of the College, an English "Speech in the College Hall after Dinner," by
James Noel, a Prologue in Latin, and an Epilogue in English. In the
middle of page 63 is pasted a note of four errata. On page 64 is a list
of the six men under whom the meeting was begun in 1726/7, and of their
twelve successors for the following two years.

From the Heber collection.


WESTROPP, HODDER M.--Handbook of Archaeology. The Traveller's Art
Companion to the Museums and Ancient Remains of Italy, Greece, and
Egypt. By Hodder M. Westropp. [cut] London: Bell & Daldy, . . . 1868.
_8vo, half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Seven plates, and numerous illustrations in the text.


WESTWOOD, J. O.--Fac-similes of the Miniatures & Ornaments of
Anglo-Saxon & Irish Manuscripts executed by J. O. Westwood, . . . drawn
on stone by W. R. Tymms. Chromo-lithographed by Day and Son, . . .
London, Bernard Quaritch, . . . MDCCCLXVIII. _Royal folio, red levant
morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges, by F. Bedford._

Title in a coloured border, and fifty-three coloured plates.


WESTWOOD, THOMAS.--The Chronicle of the 'Compleat Angler' of Izaak
Walton and Charles Cotton. Being a Bibliographical Record of its various
phases and mutations. By Thomas Westwood. London: Willis and Sotheran . . .
1864. _4to, half morocco, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


WESTWOOD, THOMAS.--The Sword of Kingship. A legend of the "Mort
d'Arthure." By T. Westwood. London: printed for private circulation, by
Whittingham and Wilkins. 1866. _4to, red levant morocco, gilt back,
sides richly decorated in gold and mosaic scrolls, &c., gilt edges, by
Bosquet._


WESTWOOD AND SATCHELL.--Bibliotheca Piscatoria   a catalogue of Books on
Angling, the Fisheries and Fish-culture, with Bibliographical Notes and
an Appendix of Citations touching on angling and fishing from old
English authors. By T. Westwood and T. Satchell. London   W. Satchell,
. . . 1883. _8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._

Large paper copy.


WHALLEY, THOMAS SEDGWICK.--Edwy and Edilda, a tale, in five parts. By
the Rev. Thomas Sedgwick Whalley, . . . Embellished with six fine
engravings, from original designs, by a Young Lady. London: printed for
T. Chapman, &c . . . 1794. _Royal 4to, red morocco, gilt edges, by The
Club Bindery._


WHARTON, GRACE AND PHILIP.--The Wits and Beaux of Society. By Grace and
Philip Wharton . . . With [16] Illustrations from Drawings by H. K.
Browne and James Godwin. Engraved by the Brothers Dalziel. London: James
Hogg & Sons, . . . [1860] _Crown 8vo, two volumes, red levant morocco,
gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


WHARTON, GRACE.--The Literature of Society. By Grace Wharton . . . With
an Introductory Chapter on the Origin of Fiction. London: Tinsley
Brothers . . . 1862. _Crown 8vo, two volumes, green levant morocco, gilt
back, side panels, gilt over uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


WHARTON, GRACE AND PHILIP.--The Queens of Society. By Grace and Philip
Wharton. Illustrated by Charles Altamont Doyle, and the Brothers
Dalziel. London: James Hogg & Sons. [n. d.] _Crown 8vo, two volumes, red
levant morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt edges, the lower ones
uncut, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


WHARTON, HENRY THORNTON.--Sappho. Memoir, Text, Selected Renderings and
a Literal Translation by Henry Thornton Wharton . . . Second Edition.
London   David Stott . . . MDCCCLXXXVII. _Post 8vo, vellum, uncut
edges._

Portrait of Sappho by Webb after Alma-Tadema, and facsimiles.


[WHARTON (R).]--Cheviot: a poetical fragment. By R. W. Newcastle upon
Tyne: printed by S. Hodgson, . . . MDCCCXVII. _8vo, brown morocco, gilt
back and sides, arms on the covers, gilt edges._

One of three copies printed upon India paper, and on one side only. The
editor, John Adamson, suggests that the author's name was possibly
Wharton.


WHEATLEY, HENRY BENJAMIN.--Notes on the Life of John Payne Collier; with
a complete list of his works, and an account of such Shakespeare
documents as are believed to be spurious. By Henry B. Wheatley. London:
Elliot Stock, . . . 1884. _16mo, original vellum wrappers, uncut edges._

Reprinted from the BIBLIOGRAPHER, 1883-84.


WHEATLEY, HENRY BENJAMIN.--Remarkable Bindings in the British Museum
selected for their beauty or historic interest and described by Henry B.
Wheatley . . . London   Sampson Low, Marston, &c . . . 1889. _4to, half
red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

One of twenty-five copies printed, with the sixty-two plates coloured in
imitation of the original bindings.


WHEATLEY, HEWETT.--The Rod and Line: or, practical hints and dainty
devices for the sure taking of trout, grayling, etc. by Hewett Wheatley,
. . . London: printed for Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, . . .
1849. _Post 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Nine coloured plates.


WHEWELL, WILLIAM.--Astronomy and General Physics considered with
reference to Natural Theology. By the Rev. William Whewell, . . .
London: William Pickering. 1833. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Bridgewater Treatise No. III.


WHISTLER, JAMES ABBOTT MCNEILL.--See Thomas, Ralph.


WHITE, GILBERT.--The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne, in the
County of Southampton: with engravings, and an appendix. . . . London:
printed by T. Bensley; for B. White and Son, . . . M,DCC,LXXXIX. _4to,
light brown levant morocco, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition. Folded frontispiece, second title with vignette by D.
Lerpiniere after S. H. Grimm, and seven other engravings after Grimm.


WHITE, GILBERT.--The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne. By the
late Gilbert White. A New Edition, with notes by eminent naturalists,
and an enlargement of the Naturalists' Calendar. London: printed for J.
and A. Arch . . . [1832] _8vo, half green morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges._

Numerous woodcut illustrations.


WHITE, GLEESON.--English Illustration 'the sixties': 1855-70 by Gleeson
White with numerous illustrations by Ford Madox Brown: A Boyd Houghton
Arthur Hughes: Charles Keene: M. J. Lawless: Lord Leighton, P. R. A. Sir
J. E. Millais, P. R. A.: G. Du Maurier. J. W. North, R. A.: C. J.
Pinwell. Dante Gabriel Rossetti: W. Small: Frederick Sandys: J. McNeill
Whistler. Frederick Walker, A. R. A.: and others. Westminster Archibald
Constable and Co . . . 1897. _Imperial 8vo, original gilt cloth, gilt
top, uncut edges._


WHITE, HENRY KIRKE.--Clifton Grove, a sketch in verse, with Other Poems,
by Henry Kirke White, . . . London, Printed by N. Biggs, . . . for
Vernor and Hood, . . . 1803. _Small 8vo, citron levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Chambolle-Duru._

First edition.

Two portraits of the author inserted, one a proof before letters.

The severe criticism of this book in two numbers of the _Monthly Review_
is supposed to have accelerated the author's death.


WHITE, HENRY KIRKE.--The Poetical Works of Henry Kirke White. London
William Pickering   1830. _Foolscap 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Memoir by Sir Harris Nicolas, and a portrait of White.


WHITE, RICHARD GRANT.--Shakespeare's Scholar: being historical and
critical studies of his text, characters, and commentators, with an
examination of Mr. Collier's folio of 1632. By Richard Grant White, . . .
New York: D. Appleton and Company, . . . M.DCCC.LIV. _8vo, cloth,
gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition.


WHITE, RICHARD GRANT.--An Essay on the Authorship of the three parts of
King Henry the Sixth. By Richard Grant White. Riverside Press: . . .
Cambridge, . . . 1859. _8vo, half brown morocco, gilt top, uncut edges._

Twenty-five copies privately printed.


WHITE, RICHARD GRANT.--Memoirs of the Life of William Shakespeare, with
an essay toward the expression of his genius, and an account of the rise
and progress of the English Drama. By Richard Grant White. Boston:
Little, Brown, and Company. 1866. _8vo, half olive morocco, gilt top,
uncut edges._

Portrait on India paper, after Burbage.

No. 5 of one hundred large paper copies printed.


WHITEHEAD, WILLIAM.--Atys and Adrastus, a tale In the Manner of Dryden's
Fables. By Mr. William Whitehead, Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridge. . . .
London: Printed for R. Manby, . . . And Sold by M. Cooper, . . . M DCC
XLIV. _Folio, boards, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


WHITEHEAD, WILLIAM.--The School for Lovers, a comedy. As it is Acted at
the Theatre Royal in Drury-Lane. By William Whitehead, Esq; Poet
Laureat. London: Printed for R. and J. Dodsley . . . and Sold by J.
Hinxman, . . . M DCC LXII. . . . _8vo, morocco, by The Club Bindery._

First edition.


WHITEHEAD, WILLIAM.--Plays and Poems by William Whitehead, Esq. Poet
Laureat . . . London; printed for J. Dodsley . . . MDCCLXXIV-XXXVIII.
_Crown 8vo, three volumes, half red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top,
uncut edges, by Bedford._ Three portraits of the author inserted, two
on India paper, one a proof before letters.

The third volume is printed at York and comprises "Poems by William
Whitehead . . . to which are prefixed, Memoirs of his Life and Writings
by W. Mason."


WHITMAN, WALT.--Leaves of Grass. Brooklyn, New York: 1855. _Folio,
original green cloth._

First edition: with three-quarter standing portrait engraved on steel,
and four preliminary leaves of English and American criticisms.


WHITMAN, WALT.--Leaves of Grass   Boston   James R. Osgood and Company
1881-82. _12mo, cloth._

Full-length portrait engraved on steel.


WHITMAN, WALT.--Walt Whitman's Drum-Taps. New-York. 1865. _12mo, cloth._

First edition, with the sequel, "When Lilacs last in the Door-yard
bloom'd," and other pieces. Washington, 1865-66.


WHITTIER, JOHN GREENLEAF.--Poems, by John G. Whittier. . . .
Philadelphia: published by Joseph Healy. . . . 1838. _12mo, original
cloth._

First edition.


WHITTIER, JOHN GREENLEAF.--Miriam and other poems. By John Greenleaf
Whittier. [vignette] Boston: Fields, Osgood, & Co. 1871. _16mo, original
cloth._

First edition: with woodcut frontispiece, and two vignettes.


WHITTIER, JOHN GREENLEAF.--Hazel-blossoms. By John Greenleaf Whittier.
Boston: James R. Osgood and Company, . . . 1875. _16mo, cloth._

First edition.


WHITTIER, JOHN GREENLEAF.--See Lowell, J. R. The Pioneer.


WIGHT, JOHN.--Mornings at Bow Street. A selection of the most humourous
and entertaining Reports which have appeared in the Morning Herald. By
Mr Wight, (Bow Street reporter to the Morning Herald.) With twenty-one
illustrative drawings, By George Cruikshank. . . . London: printed for
Charles Baldwyn, . . . M DCCC XXIV. _Post 8vo, half green levant
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition, with all the plates printed separately. In later
editions, they are in the text.


WIGHT, JOHN.--More Mornings at Bow Street. A new collection of humorous
and entertaining reports. By John Wight, of the Morning Herald. With
twenty-five illustrations by George Cruikshank [vignette] London: James
Robins and Co. . . . MDCCCXXVII. _Post 8vo, half green levant morocco,
gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

First edition, with frontispiece etching and twenty-five woodcuts.


WILDE, OSCAR O'FLAHERTIE WILLS.--A Hovse of Pomegranates by Oscar Wilde
   The design & decoration of this book by C. Ricketts & C. H. Shannon
London   James R. Osgood McIlvaine & Co   M.DCCC XCI. _4to, decorated
cloth, uncut edges._

First edition.


WILDE, OSCAR.--The Pictvre of Dorian Gray. By Oscar Wilde   Ward Lock
and Co   London New York & Melbovrne. [1891] _Crown 8vo, half cloth,
uncut edges._

First edition.


WILDE, OSCAR.--Lady Windermere's Fan   a play about a good woman by
Oscar Wilde   London . . . Elkin Mathews and John Lane . . . MDCCCXCIII.
_4to, buckram, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed.


WILDE, OSCAR.--A Woman of no Importance by Oscar Wilde   London   John
Lane . . . M D CCC XCIV. _4to, yellow buckram, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, fifty printed.


WILDE, OSCAR.--The Priest and the Acolyte   Honi soit qui mal y pense.
Privately Printed for Presentation only. [1894] _4to, original brown
wrappers, uncut edges._


WILDE, OSCAR.--Salome a tragedy in one act: translated [by Lord Alfred
Bruce Douglas] from the French of Oscar Wilde: pictured by Aubrey
Beardsley   London: Elkin Mathews & John Lane . . . 1894. _4to, olive
silk, uncut edges._

Only one hundred copies printed, with the title-page and eleven
full-page plates on Japan paper.


WILDE, OSCAR.--The Sphinx   by Oscar Wilde [woodcut] With decorations by
Charles Ricketts   London   M DCCCXCIV   Elkin Mathews and John Lane . . .
_4to, vellum boards, decorated in gilt, uncut edges._

First edition, only twenty-five copies printed.


WILDE, OSCAR.--The Importance of being Earnest   a trivial comedy for
serious people by the Author of Lady Windermere's Fan   London   Leonard
Smithers and Co . . . [Chiswick Press] M DCCCXCIX. _4to, cloth, uncut
edges._


WILKES, JOHN.--See Jest Books.


WILKIE AND GEDDES.--Etchings by Sir David Wilkie, R. A. Limner to H. M.
for Scotland and by Andrew Geddes, A. R. A. with biographical sketches
by David Laing, F. S. A. S. Edinburgh: MDCCCLXXV. _Folio, maroon levant
morocco, back panels and side borders blind-tooled, uncut edges._ One
hundred copies printed. This copy is extra-illustrated by a number of
trial proofs of the etchings, executed for the author, David Laing,
during the progress of the publication.


WILKINSON, SIR JOHN GARDNER.--Topography of Thebes, and General View of
Egypt. Being a short account of the principal objects worthy of notice
in the Valley of the Nile, to the Second Cataract and Wadee Samneh, with
the Fyoom, Oases, and Eastern Desert, from Sooez to Berenice; with
remarks on the manners and customs of the Ancient Egyptians and the
productions of the country, &c &c. By J. G. Wilkinson. London: John
Murray . . . MDCCCXXXV. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Eleven plates.


WILKINSON, SIR JOHN GARDNER.--(I.-III.) Manners and Customs of the
Ancient Egyptians, including their Private Life, Government, Laws, Arts,
Manufactures, Religion, and Early History; derived from a comparison of
the Paintings, Sculptures, and Monuments still existing, with the
accounts of Ancient Authors. Illustrated by Drawings of those Subjects.
By J. G. Wilkinson . . . London: John Murray . . . MDCCCXXXVII.

(IV.-VI.) A Second Series of the Manners and Customs of the Ancient
Egyptians, including their religion, agriculture, &c. derived from a
comparison of the paintings, sculptures, and monuments still existing,
with the accounts of ancient authors. By Sir J. Gardner Wilkinson, . . .
Two volumes, and a volume of plates. . . . London: John Murray, . . . M
DCCCXLI. _8vo, six volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition of both series. Eighty-eight plates, some coloured, and
numerous woodcuts in the text.


WILKINSON, SIR JOHN GARDNER.--Modern Egypt and Thebes: being a
description of Egypt; including the information required for travellers
in that country. By Sir Gardner Wilkinson . . . with woodcuts and a
map, London: John Murray . . . 1843. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut
edges._

First edition.


WILKINSON, SIR JOHN GARDNER.--Dalmatia and Montenegro: with a Journey to
Mostar in Herzegovina, and remarks on the slavonic nations; the history
of Dalmatia and Ragusa; the Uscocs; &c &c. By J. Gardner Wilkinson . . .
London: John Murray . . . 1848. _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Fifteen maps and plates and numerous woodcut
illustrations.


WILKINSON, SIR JOHN GARDNER.--On Colour and on the necessity for a
general diffusion of taste among all classes. With remarks on laying out
dressed or geometrical gardens. Examples of good and bad taste
illustrated by woodcuts and coloured plates in contrast. By Sir J.
Gardner Wilkinson . . . London   John Murray, . . . 1858. _8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._


WILKINSON, SIR JOHN GARDNER.--See Herodotus.


WILKINSON, RICHARD.--Vice Reclaim'd: or, the Passionate Mistress.
A Comedy. As it is Acted at the Theatre Royal, By Her Majesty's
Servants. Written by Richard Wilkinson, Gent. [Two lines in Latin]
London: Printed for Bernard Lintott, at the Middle-Temple-Gate in
Fleet-street. 1703. Price 1s. 6d. _4to, blue levant morocco, gilt
back, gilt edges, by Zaehnsdorf._

First edition. A1-A4, a1-a4, and B-I4 in fours, half-title, A1, title,
A2.


[WILLIAMS, SIR CHARLES HANBURY.]--H----s-s----y to Sir C[harles]
H[anbury] W[illiam]s: or, The Rural Reflection of a Welch Poet. London:
Printed for A. Moore . . . 1746. . . . _Folio, cloth, by The Club
Bindery. Bound with two other works._


WILLIAMS, D. E.--The Life and Correspondence of Sir Thomas Lawrence . . .
by D. E. Williams . . . London: Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley . . .
1831. _8vo, two volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges._

Illustrated by three portraits of Lawrence, and (inserted) forty-five
portraits, etc., after his paintings, including India proofs and
engraver's etchings.


WILLIAMS, D. E.--The Life and Correspondence of Sir Thomas Lawrence,
1831. _8vo, two volumes extended to four, red levant morocco, gilt back,
gilt edges, by Bedford._

Another copy. In addition to the three portraits of Lawrence issued with
this book, two hundred and six other portraits, etc., have been added,
including all the important examples of the artist's lifework. The
greater majority of these inserted plates are in proof state, some are
coloured, and all are selected impressions. An autograph letter of
Lawrence is also inserted, and special title-pages printed.


WILLIAMS, J. M., _editor_.--The Dramatic Censor: or, critical and
biographical Illustration of the British Stage. For the Year 1811.
Involving a correct register of every night's performances at our
metropolitan theatres, And published with a View to sustain the Morality
and Dignity of the Drama. Edited by J. M. Williams, L. L. D. . . .
London: Printed by G. Brimmer, . . . [1811] _8vo, half calf._

Portrait of "Anthony Pasquin" (John Williams) by F. Bartolozzi.

Eleven numbers, published on the eleventh of each month, beginning with
January. Although December has no separate heading, the dramatic events
of the month are chronicled through to the thirty-first, under November.


WILLIAMSON, JOHN.--The British Angler: or, a Pocket-companion for
Gentlemen-fishers. Being a New and Methodical Treatise of the Art of
Angling: Comprehending all that is Curious and Useful in the Knowledge
of that Polite Diversion. As: I. An Introduction; . . . II. The
Angler's Apparatus: . . . III. An exact Description of the several
Kinds of Fish that are found in the Rivers, . . . IV. The whole
Practice of Angling: . . .

Together with Supplemental Discourses, 1. On Fish-ponds and
Reservatories. 2. On the Laws against Poachers, and in Favour of the
Fair Angler. Also, Excellent Receipts for Dressing of Fish, and a
complete Index, in which the Terms in Use among Anglers are
occasionally explained. Embellished with Copper-Plates curiously
Engraved. The Whole Compiled from approved Authors, and above Thirty
Years Experience, By John Williamson, Gent. Who has added a
Versification of the principal Heads, at the End of each Chapter, for
the Help of Memory. London: Printed for J. Hodges, . . . M DCC XL.
_12mo, original calf._

First edition: with frontispiece by G. Bickham, and three folded plates
by B. Cole.


"WILLINGTON, JAMES."--See Goldsmith, Oliver.


WILLIS, NATHANIEL PARKER--Letters from under a Bridge. and Poems. By N.
P. Willis, Esq. . . . London: George Virtue, . . . 1840. _4to, green
levant morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt edges, by The Club
Bindery._

First edition. Portrait by F. C. Lewis after Lawrence, engraved
title-page and nine other plates after W. H. Bartlett.

The Letters were written to Dr. T. Olcutt Porter, and are dedicated to
Miss Jane Porter. The Prefatory Note is dated London, March 30, 1840.


WILLIS, ROBERT, _translator_.--Facsimile of the Sketch-book of Wilars de
Honecort, an architect of the thirteenth century; with commentaries and
descriptions by M. J. B. A. Lassus, . . . and by M. J.[ules] Quicherat,
. . . Translated and Edited, with many additional Articles and Notes, by
the Rev. Robert Willis, . . . London: John Henry and James Parker. . . .
1859. _4to, purple levant morocco, gilt back, side fillets._

Frontispiece bust portrait of Lassus and seventy-three plates on India
paper, besides forty-three woodcuts.


WILLS, WILLIAM GORMAN.--Melchior. By W. G. Wills. 1884. [Printed by
Hutchings and Crowsley, London] _4to, vellum boards, uncut edges._

One of seven copies privately printed.


WILSON, CHARLES HEATH.--Life and Works of Michelangelo Buonarroti by
Charles Heath Wilson the Life partly compiled from that by the Commend.
Aurelio Gotti--[50 illustrations] London   John Murray, . . .
MDCCCLXXVI. _Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


WILSON AND GREY.--A Practical Treatise upon modern Printing Machinery
and Letterpress Printing. By Fred J. F. Wilson and Douglas Grey.
Illustrated with Numerous Engravings. Cassell & Company, . . . London,
. . . 1888. . . . _Royal 8vo, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges._


WILSON, JAMES GRANT.--The Life and Letters of Fitz-Greene Halleck. By
James Grant Wilson. . . . New York: D. Appleton and Company, . . . 1869.
_Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

No. 36 of one hundred large paper copies printed, with portrait by H. B.
Hall after Inman, and engraved title-page.


WILSON, JOHN.--Noctes Ambrosianae by Professor [John] Wilson. William
Blackwood and Sons   Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLV.[-VI] _Crown 8vo, four
volumes, calf, gilt back._

First collected edition, with a preface by J. F. F.


WILSON, JOHN.--Noctes Ambrosianae by the late John Wilson . . . Wm.
Maginn, . . . J. G. Lockhart, James Hogg, and others. Revised edition
with memoirs and notes by R. Shelton Mackenzie, . . . New York   W. J.
Widdleton, . . . 1863. _12mo, five volumes, cloth, uncut edges_.

Four portraits after Sir J. Watson Gordon, Maclise, etc., and a
facsimile.


WILSON, JOHN.--The Poetical Works of Professor Wilson ["Christopher
North"]. William Blackwood and Sons. Edinburgh . . . MDCCCLVIII. _Crown
8vo, calf, gilt back, by Henderson & Bisset._


WILSON, RICHARD.--See Hastings, Thomas.


WILSON, THOMAS.--A Catalogue Raisonne of the select Collection of
Engravings of an Amateur [Thomas Wilson] London   MDCCCXXVIII. _4to,
blue levant morocco, rich back and side panels, gilt edges, by W.
Matthews._

Privately printed. The engraved initials and head-pieces are on India
paper, and two autograph letters of Wilson, together with one hundred
and thirteen portraits and other engravings, are inserted. The majority
of the plates are in proof state; fourteen are by Bartolozzi, five by
Raphael Morghen, and among the others are notable examples by Rembrandt,
Nanteuil, Edelinck, Caroline Watson, Hollar, Drevet, Wille, Tardieu,
Crispin de Pass, Masson, the Sadelers, and others.


WILSON, THOMAS.--A Catalogue Raisonne of the select Collection, &c.,
1828. _Royal 4to, green morocco, gilt back, side panels, gilt edges._

Large paper copy, with proofs on India paper. Inserted are over one
hundred specimens of engraving by Faithorne, Wierix, Raphael Morghen,
Hollar, Edelinck, Bartolozzi, the Pass family, etc.

Presentation copy from Thomas Wilson to his wife. From the collection of
John Allan.


WILSON, THOMAS.--A Descriptive Catalogue of the Prints of Rembrandt. By
an amateur. London: J. F. Setchel . . . 1836. _8vo, green levant
morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by Holloway._

Lowndes describes this book as "privately printed," but as the
title-page bears the subscription imprint of eight publishers of books
and prints, the statement is largely fictitious, though in any event the
number printed is known to have been very small.


WILSON, THOMAS.--A Descriptive Catalogue of the Prints of Rembrandt.
1836. Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges.

Large paper copy, of which ten were printed.

Presented by the author to Mr. Tiffin, Sept. 19, 1836, with an inserted
letter from Wilson pertinent to the subject.


WINCHELSEA, ANNE FINCH, COUNTESS OF.--Poems on Several Occasions, viz.

  The Prevalence of Custom.
  The Mussulman's Dream.
  Jupiter and the Farmer.
  The Spleen.
  The Philosopher, the Young Man and his Statue.
  Adam pos'd.
  The House of Socrates.
  The Wit and the Beau.
  Cupid and Folly.
  Alcidor.
  The Atheist and Acorn.
  The Miller, his Son, and their Ass.
  The Phoenix.
  A Nocturnal Reverie.
  The Shepherd piping to the Fishes.
  Love, Death, and Reputation.
  Fanscomb's Barn.
  Alexander's Epistle to Hephaestion.
  The Lord and the Bramble.
  The cautious Lover.
  The Equipage.
  The Executor.
  The Change.
  The Nightingale.
  The Tradesman and Scholar.
  Life's Progress.
  Aristomenes, &c. a Tragedy, &c.

Written by the Right Honourable Anne, Countess of Winchelsea.
London: Printed by J. B. and sold by W. Taylor . . . and Jonas Browne
. . . 1714. _8vo, old red morocco, gilt back, side borders, arms in the
corners, gilt edges, in a brown levant morocco case with gilt back._

"The Spleen" was first printed in Charles Gildon's Miscellany, 1701.
Lady Winchelsea's poetical name was "Ardelia."


WIRT, WILLIAM.--The Letters of the British Spy. Originally published in
the Virginia Argus, in August and September, 1803. The second edition.
Richmond: printed by Samuel Pleasants, Junior. December, 1803. _Crown
8vo, calf, citron edges._

Inserted are two portraits of Wirt, by J. B. Longacre and P. Maverick, a
print of Richmond by Maverick, and an autograph letter from Wirt to
Henry Thompson, dated Washington, Dec. 4, 1820.


WIT.--Of Modern Wit. An Epistle To The Right Honourable Sir William
Young. London: Printed for Henry Lintot . . . MDCCXXXII. _Folio, red
levant morocco, by The Club Bindery. Bound with ten other works._


WIT.--The New Foundling Hospital for Wit. Being a collection of several
curious pieces, in verse and prose: written by

  Lord Chesterfield,
  Lord Hardwicke,
  Lord Lyttelton,
  Sir C. H. Williams,
  Mr. Wilkes,
  Mr. Churchill,
  Mr. Garrick,
  Mr. Potter,
  Dr. Akenside.

and other eminent persons. London: Printed in the Year MDCCLXVIII.
_Small 8vo, blue levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Riviere._

Caricature frontispiece.


WIT.--A new edition, with great additions. The Festival of Wit: or, the
Small Talker. Consisting of Flights of Humour and Genius, selected from
a voluminous work, In the Possession of G***** K***, Summer
Resident at W----. With the Life of the Author and Compiler, Written
by Himself. When Prussia's Monarch writes, why may not I? London,
Printed, by Permission of the Editor, for M. Smith; and sold by the
Booksellers of Piccadilly, Fleet-street, and Paternoster-row.
1783. _Small 8vo, panelled calf, gilt back and sides, citron top, uncut
edges, by Riviere._


WIT.--(I.) The New Festival of Wit; or, Gleanings, From the best
Authors of Jokes, Jests, and Flashes of Merriment; with Curious
Anecdotes. . . . London: Printed for R. Rusted, . . . six-pence, [n. d.]

(II.) The Paragon of Mirth & Drollery, or the new Merry Jester,
Calculated for the Sons of conviviality, and jocularity. London: printed
for R. Rusted, . . . [n. d.] _12mo, two works in one volume, red
straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispieces engraved by T. Ovenden and printed in brown ink, the
second hand-coloured in part.


WIT.--Wits Museum, or the new London Jester; a collection by the choice
Spirits of the present age. A new Edition [vignette] London, Printed for
W. Lane, . . . Price Two Shillings. [1790] _12mo, red straight-grain
morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Engraved title-page and frontispiece, "Charles Fox & his Merry
Companions."


WIT.--Attic Wit; or, a Medley of Humour: Containing an agreeable variety
of Bon Mots, Jokes, & Repartees; being Humorous, Whimsical, Laughable,
Novel and Sentimental; In prose and verse. designed To promote Mirth,
Jocularity, and Chearfulness, in in both sexes. London: Printed for
and sold by A. Hamilton, . . . 1791. Ornamented with an engraved
frontispiece. Price one shilling. _12mo, red straight-grain morocco,
Janseniste, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._

Engraved frontispiece, "Attic Meeting or the Jovial Companions."


WIT.--The Museum of Wit; being a choice collection of Poetical Pieces,
Instructive and Entertaining; . . . Selected from various authors. . . .
London: printed for Crosby and Letterman, . . . By J. Cundee, . . .
1800. _12mo, green straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt edges, by
The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece by Scott after Satchwell.


WIT.--The Banquet of Wit: containing a choice collection of bon-mots,
jests, repartees, for the Amusement of the Fire-side, [woodcut] . . .
Gosport: printed by J. Watts. And Sold by Crosby and Letterman, . . .
London. [n. d.] _12mo, green straight-grain morocco, Janseniste, gilt
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Frontispiece, "The Rival Candidates," by T. S. Seed.


WIT.--The Encyclopedia of Wit. [vignette] London, Printed for R.
Phillips, . . . [n. d.] Price Six Shillings in Boards. _12mo, red
morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Alfred Matthews._

Engraved frontispiece title, with vignette, "A Laughing Audience," by E.
Mills after Hogarth.


WIT.--See Jest Books.


WIT'S MAGAZINE.--The Wit's Magazine; or, Library of Momus. Being a
Compleat Repository of Mirth, Humour, and Entertainment . . . [Edited by
Thomas Holcroft] London: Printed for Harrison and Co . . . MDCCLXXXIV-V.
_8vo, two volumes in one, mottled calf, gilt back, side border, gilt
edges._

The complete issue of this magazine from January, 1784, to May, 1785,
inclusive. Of the seventeen double-page plates, five are by Blake.


WOLCOTT, ROGER.--Poetical Meditations, being the Improvement of some
Vacant Hours, By Roger Wolcott, Esq, with a Preface By the Reverend M^{r}
Bulkley of Colchester. New London: Printed and Sold by L. Green, 1725.
_Small 8vo, red morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Bedford._


WOLLSTONECRAFT, MARY.--See Godwin, Mary Wollstonecraft.


WOLSELEY, GARNET JOSEPH, (FIRST) VISCOUNT.--The Life of John Churchill
Duke of Marlborough to the Accession of Queen Anne   by General
Viscount Wolseley, . . . [vignette] . . . London   Richard Bentley and
Son . . . 1894 . . . _8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

First edition. Eight portraits, five plans, four vignettes, two views,
and one facsimile.


WOLTMANN, ALFRED.--Holbein and his Time. By Dr. Alfred Woltmann.
Translated by F. E. Bunnett. With sixty illustrations. London: Richard
Bentley and Son, . . . 1872.

Proof sheets, unbound.


WOLTMANN AND FOUQUE.--The White Lady [by C. Von Woltmann] and Undine [by
La Motte Fouque] London   William Pickering   1844. _Post 8vo, white
satin, brocaded in silk and embroidered in light green, gilt top, uncut
edges, by The Club Bindery._

Printed by Whittingham at the Chiswick Press, with numerous woodcut
illustrations.


WOOD, ANTHONY A.--See Jest Books. Modius Salium.


WOOD, JOHN GEORGE.--Homes without Hands. Being a description of the
habitations of animals, classed according to their principle of
construction. By the Rev. J. G. Wood, . . . With new designs by W. F.
Keyl, and E. Smith. Engraved by G. Pearson. London: Longmans, Green, and
Co. 1866. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._


WOOD, MARY ANNE EVERETT (MRS. GEORGE PYCOCK GREEN).--Letters of Royal
and Illustrious Ladies of Great Britain, from the commencement of the
twelfth century to the close of the Reign of Queen Mary. Edited chiefly
from the originals in the State Paper Office, the Tower of London, the
British Museum, and other State Archives, by Mary Anne Everett Wood.
Illustrated with fac-simile autographs . . . London: Henry Colburn . . .
1846. _Crown 8vo, three volumes, gilt back, citron edges, by Bedford._


WOOD, ROBERT.--An Essay on the Original Genius and Writings of Homer:
with a comparative view of the ancient and present state of the Troade.
Illustrated with engravings. By the late Robert Wood, Esq; . . . London:
Printed by H. Hughs; For T. Payne, . . . and P. Elmsly, . . . MDCCLXXV.
_4to, green morocco, back and sides richly tooled with brackets and
floral festoons, the arms of Horace Walpole on both covers, gilt edges._

Portrait of Homer engraved by Basire, four large plates, and vignettes
engraved by Bartolozzi.

Presentation copy from Mrs. Wood to Horace Walpole, with a note from
Elmsly inserted, stating that he had orders to "bind the copy in the
most elegant manner."


WOODCUTS.--A Collection of eighty-four woodcut engravings, India proofs,
by Carbonneau and other French artists. Paris 1825-1850. _Folio, half
brown levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, by R. W. Smith._


WOODFALL, WILLIAM.--See Savage, Richard.


WOOLLEY, CHARLES.--A two Years Journal in New-York: And part of its
Territories in America. By C. W. A. M. London, Printed for John Wyat, . . .
and Eben Tracy, . . . MDCCI. _16mo, blue levant morocco, gilt back,
side borders, gilt edges, by The Club Bindery._


WORDSWORTH AND COLERIDGE.--Lyrical Ballads, with a few other poems.
London: printed for J. & A. Arch, . . . 1798. _Foolscap 8vo, calf, gilt
back, side borders._

First edition.


WORDSWORTH, WILLIAM.--Poems, . . . by William Wordsworth, author of the
Lyrical Ballads . . . London, Printed for Longman, . . . 1807. _12mo,
two volumes, calf, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First collected edition.


WORDSWORTH, WILLIAM.--The White Doe of Rylstone; or the Fate of the
Nortons, a Poem. By William Wordsworth. London: printed for Longman, . . .
by James Ballantyne and C^{o}., Edinburgh 1815. _4to, calf, gilt back,
gilt top, uncut edges, by Bedford._

First edition, with a frontispiece engraved by Bromley after Sir George
Beaumont.


WORDSWORTH, WILLIAM.--[The White Doe of Rylstone. The forty-four
illustrations by Birket Foster, and H. Noel Humphreys, retouched
engraver's proofs on India paper.] _4to, half green morocco._


WORDSWORTH, WILLIAM.--The Waggoner, A Poem. To which are added, Sonnets.
By William Wordsworth. . . . London: Printed by Strahan and
Spottiswoode, . . . for Longman, Hurst, . . . 1819. _12mo, red levant
morocco, side borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

First edition: dedicated to Charles Lamb.


WORDSWORTH, WILLIAM.--Memorials of a Tour on the Continent, 1820. By
William Wordsworth. London: printed for Longman, Hurst, . . . 1822.
_8vo, red levant morocco, side borders, gilt top, uncut edges, by The
Club Bindery._

First edition.


WORDSWORTH, WILLIAM.--The Poetical Works of William Wordsworth. London:
Edward Moxon: . . . MDCCCXXXVI[-VII]. _Post 8vo, six volumes, half red
levant morocco, gilt back, gilt top, uncut edges, by Riviere._

Portrait by Watt after Pickersgill.


WORLD, THE.--See British Essayists.


WORLIDGE, THOMAS.--[Select Collection of Drawings from curious Antique
Gems, etched after the manner of Rembrandt by Thomas Worlidge   London
1768.] _Royal 8vo, red levant morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by Allo._

The true edition of 1768, without the letterpress, and with one hundred
and sixty-nine plates.


WORLIDGE, THOMAS.--A Select Collection of Drawings from Curious Antique
Gems; most of them in the possession of the Nobility and Gentry of this
Kingdom; etched after the manner of Rembrandt. By T. Worlidge, painter.
London: printed by Dryden Leach, for M. Worlidge, . . . and M.
Wicksteed, . . . MDCCLXVIII. _4to, old red straight-grain morocco, gilt
back, side borders, corner ornaments, gilt edges, by C. Smith._

Large paper copy of the second edition, with etched portrait, 1754, and
one hundred and eighty-two plates, proofs on French plate paper.

The text calls for only one hundred and eighty plates, but there are two
Fauns at No. 11, and preceding No. 85, at the beginning of Volume II, is
an extra plate, "Medusa Antique."


WORNUM, RALPH NICHOLSON.--The Epochs of Painting. A Biographical and
Critical Essay on Painting and Painters of all times and many places. By
Ralph Nicholson Wornum, . . . London: Chapman and Hall, . . . MDCCCLXIV.
_8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Forty illustrations.


WORNUM, RALPH NICHOLSON.--Some Account of the Life and Works of Hans
Holbein, Painter, of Augsburg. With numerous illustrations. By Ralph
Nicholson Wornum, . . . London: Chapman and Hall, . . . 1867. . . .
_Royal 8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Portrait by C. W. Sharpe after Holbein, and thirty-three other
illustrations.


WOTY, WILLIAM.--Poems on Several Occasions; by W. Woty. . . . Derby:
printed for the author, by J. Drewry. M, DCC, LXXX. _8vo, contemporary
red morocco, gilt back, side borders, gilt edges._

The Heber copy.


WREATH, THE.--See Du Bois, Edward.


WRIGHT, MABEL OSGOOD.--The Friendship of Nature A New England Chronicle
of Birds and Flowers by Mabel Osgood Wright. With Twelve Full-page
Illustrations from Photographs by the Author. New York Macmillan and
Company . . . 1894. _12mo, boards, uncut edges._

Large paper copy, two hundred and fifty printed.


WYN, ELIS.--See Borrow, George.


WYNNE, JAMES.--Private Libraries of New York. By James Wynne, M. D.
New York: E. French, . . . M D CCC LX. _8vo, cloth, uncut edges._

Woodcut frontispiece.


YARRELL, WILLIAM.--A History of British Fishes. By William Yarrell . . .
Illustrated by nearly 400 woodcuts . . . London: John Van Voorst . . .
M.DCCC.XXXVI [-LX]. _Imperial 8vo, two volumes, green levant morocco,
back and sides richly tooled, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Largest paper copy (10-11/16 by 7-1/8 inches), with portrait of the
Author, proof on India paper, and both Supplements, the second edited by
Sir John Richardson. A Life of Yarrell and a list of his writings appear
in the first volume.


YARRELL, WILLIAM.--A History of British Birds. By William Yarrell . . .
Illustrated by 520 wood-engravings. London: John Van Voorst . . .
M.DCCC.XLIII.[-XLV-LVL] _Imperial 8vo, four volumes, green levant
morocco, back and sides richly tooled, gilt edges, by Bedford._

Largest paper copy (10-11/18 by 7-1/8 inches), with the two Supplements.


YEATS, WILLIAM BUTLER.--The Wind among the Reeds. By William Butler
Yeats   London. Elkin Mathews . . . MDCCCCIII. _Post 8vo, half cloth,
uncut edges._


YELLOW BOOK.--The Yellow Book   An Illustrated Quarterly   Volume I
April 1894 [Volume XIII, April, 1897]   London: Elkin Mathews & John
Lane . . . _4to, thirteen volumes, decorated yellow cloth, uncut edges._


YOUNG, EDWARD.--Two Epistles to Mr. Pope, Concerning the Authors of the
Age. [vignette] London: Printed for Lawton Gilliver, . . . MDCCXXX.
_8vo, red morocco, uncut edges, by The Club Bindery._

"Epistle II, From Oxford," extends from D-F2 in fours, ending with four
lines of Errata. F3-F4 are advertisements.


YOUNG, EDWARD.--The Works of the Author of the Night-Thoughts. Revised
and corrected by himself   London: Printed for J. Buckland . . .
MDCCLXXIV.-[W. Owen,-XXIII and T. Cadell-XXVIII.] _12mo, six volumes,
red morocco, gilt back, gilt edges, by J. Clarke._

Portrait by Boitard. The fifth volume contains a Life of the poet.


YOUNG, EDWARD.--Night Thoughts by Edward Young, D. D. With the Life of
the Author, and notes critical & explanatory. [vignette by P. Rothwell
after Stothard]   London   Printed by C. Whittingham for T.
Heptinstall, . . . 1798. _Royal 8vo, Spanish calf, gilt back, side
borders._

Large paper copy, with portrait by J. Collyer, and eight illustrations
after Stothard.


YOUNG, EDWARD.--The Poetical Works of Edward Young. London William
Pickering, 1834. _Foolscap 8vo, two volumes, cloth, uncut edges._

Memoir by the Rev. John Mitford, and a portrait of Young.


YOUNG, JOHN, _editor_.--A Catalogue of Pictures by British Artists, in
the possession of Sir John Fleming Leicester, . . . with etchings from
the whole collection. Including the pictures in his gallery at Tabley
House, Cheshire; . . . and accompanied with historical and biographical
notices. By John Young, . . . London: printed by W. Bulmer and W. Nicol,
. . . April 2, 1821. _Folio, half blue morocco, uncut edges._

Thirty-three plates (seventy figures) on India paper.


YOUNG CHEVALIER.--See Pretender.


ZAEHNSDORF, JOSEPH W.--The Art of Bookbinding by Joseph W. Zaehnsdorf
Illustrated. London   George Bell & Sons . . . 1880. _Crown 8vo, cloth,
uncut edges._

Fifty copies printed on large paper, for private circulation only.


ZIMMERN, HELEN.--See Firdusi.


ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY.--The Gardens and Menagerie of the Zoological Society
Delineated. Published with the Sanction of the Council . . . Chiswick:
Printed by Charles Whittingham . . . M.DCCC.XXXI. _8vo, two volumes in
one, calf, gilt back, gilt edges._

Printed on India paper, with woodcut illustrations of Quadrupeds and
Birds, engraved by Branston and Wright after drawings by William Harvey.


ZOUCH, THOMAS.--The Life of Isaac Walton; including notices of his
contemporaries. By Thomas Zouch . . . London: Septimus Prowett, Strand.
MDCCCXXIV. _4to, half morocco, uncut edges._

Largest paper copy. Twenty-one plates, proofs on India paper, including
two portraits, and five other India proofs added.